
#auto-position
highest formal act of philosophical decision through which
philosophical faith in the real allows it to be posited as the real
in a hallucinatory way. since it is also the cause ofphilosophy 's
real appearance, vision-in-one demotes the priority of the auto­
position ofphilosophy 's own transcendental unity as real.

the formal feature of auto-position is structural and com­
pletely exceeds the presence of this concept in fichte (1=1).
not only the transcendental one-the peak of what philoso­
p hy real ly knows-but any concept whatsoever (cf. deleuze)
posits itself or is in a state of doublet, redoubling, self-survey .. . .
auto-position's phi losophizing i s concentrated i n the "qua" and
the "l ike," in the repetition of a more or less differentiated same.
this feature coordinates with philosophy's specifically structural
debt to perception as its point of departure and, on the other
hand, to transcending the latter as its essential organon. object
and objectivity, phenomenological self and disinterested and
philosophical self, consciousness of object and self-consciousness,
transcendent one and transcendental one, all of philosophy re­
doubles itself because it splits itself. this is the recourse of philo­
sophical faith and this faith itself.
vision-in-one lifts the specific faith-in-the-real of philosophy,
i.e. the philosophical hallucination of the real. but this lifting
is still nothing but a partial condition which is completed
through another suspension, namely the unilateralization of
the transcendental one, i.e. philosophy's divided one. this
suspension is carried out by the transcendental identity that
vision-in-one clones on the basis of this identity. auto-posi­
tion (its sufficiency, its desire for mastery, its violence) is nul­
lified, and non-philosophical thought renounces any ideal­
ism so as to allow-itself-to-be determined-in-the-last-instance
by the real. hence the characterization of non-philosophi­
cal a prioris as non-auto (decisional, positional, giving, etc.).
vision-in-one concretely undercuts the importance of such
dyads. the object is seen-in-one or dualyzed into a noetic
and transcendental side and into a noematic content on the
other side, which is the reduction of this object to the state
of occasion.



#being-in-one
in the order ofphenomenal instances, being takes "third" place
after the one-in-one and transcendental identity, or it takes
second place in the order of the (non-) one between the one and
the equivalent of being (the experience or given ofphilosophy):
this is force-of-thought 's non-auto-positional transcendence or
distance. if, for example, understood in a broad heideggerian
sense, it will be said that it is decomposed into transcendental
identity and a priori identity which then correspond with their
respective symptoms: being, which is transcendental or, prop­
erly speaking, philosophically convertible with the one; and di­
vision or duality, which is, for example, the intelligible (plato)
or intentionality (husserl), etc.

being or more specifically being (ontos) is primarily one of the
transcendentals (alongside the one, the multiple, the true, the
good, etc.) and the support of the other transcendentals, which
are its predicates, and as such, are by essence found within it.they
add nothing real to it by forming ontological knowledge, which is
a knowledge without real ity. if not that of specular real ity. when
being is understood on the basis of the meta-, which makes it
the transcendens par excel lence, and then the meta- thematizes
it in turn as such, together they form "being" insofar as it is d is­
tinguished or differentiated from being, which is now assigned
to the functions of the empirical pole of ontological difference.
difference (being of being, being of being) is then speculative,
and ontology is from the start unaware that being culminates as
speculation. the becoming-speculation of ontology takes on its
divided-doubled structure through the meta-, which adds noth­
ing to being but relates it to itself qua being. this doublet or this
auto-position of being, and thus also of being, is the heart of the
speculative or non naive experience of philosophy.
heidegger tried to un ite in "being" as ontological difference
(with being) the multiple significations and modal ities of being
that philosophy had elaborated and dispersed. thus there is
not a more general, more transcendent or more encompassing
concept than that of being and its own unity and provenance
(sense, truth, locality, etc.) . heidegger confirms the te/os of every
philosophy, namely because being is his main object (being qua
being) and his element, whether it be a primordial-transcending,
an ekstatico-horizontal and temporal opening, a "clearing" and
"l ighting," (heidegger) or a void and a pure multiple (badiou) .

a law of essence wants the concepts of "being" to be insepa­
rab le from the dual ity of a division and of a more or less d ivided,
even d isseminated, horizon, i.e. inseparable from a multiple and
a void without which it is unthinkable. hence heidegger's effort
to simultaneously protect it from nothingness, the void and the
nihilist "vapor" in order to be del ivered from being by "barring" it
in a non metaphysical way. but nothing which is concerned with
philosophy, with its attempt to think starting from itself alone and
its desire to rid itself of metaphysics can avoid positing being as a
presupposed that has primacy not only over being but also over
the one that it affects by its own division, and partial ly over the
other*:
in non-philosophy, the nomination "being" is still pos­
sibl e , but only as subj ected to its universalization
of-the-last-instance. being merely intervenes in the nomi­
nation and formulation of non-philosophical instances via
an axiomatic type of separation or abstraction: the one­
without-being, outside-being, etc. but it is possible to elab­
orate a "non-ontology" that uses general metaphysics and
ontology-whether or not this entails the speculative auto­
position of being-as material: a theory of being such as it is
cloned on the basis of being as such. the instances wherein
it is the philosophical symptomatic indication decompose
the functions it has fulfilled by becoming: on the one hand
pure transcendental identity, whose symptom is the one as
convertible with being, either intertwined with it or aligned
with it; on the other hand, by becoming a priori identity,
i.e. by transcending the latter, which is here reduced to its
phenomenal kernel of non-autopositional distance or ex­
teriority. together they constitute "force (ot) thought," which
henceforth takes the place of being or which is being-in-one.
the most extensive suspension of metaphysical author­
ity is the following: being is determined or given in-the-last­
instance-in-one. it is given " in-the-last-instance" because, as
force (ot) thought, it must be cloned from philosophical and
metaphysical being. the "question of being" is uprooted from
philosophy and transformed into a solvable problem to be
resolved according-to-the-one. non-philosophy, qua non­
ontology, secedes from the "first science of being." better
yet, non-philosophy radically effectuates the latter since it
makes being-according-to-the-one-and not " qua one" 41

the object of a science that is, in effect, first but has lost the
priority of metaphysics because it is the one's "widow" : the
one is not the object of a first science but determines it.
ultimately the utterances of non-ontology, which are those
of ontology cloned under the effect of the one-in-one, are
knowledges which are said of being-in-one-in-the-last-in­
stance or which are related to force (of) thought.

#break
mode of constitution of.first science as "unified theory " or iden­
tity-in-the-last-instance of science and philosophy, unlike the
unitary theory that blends them in-unity. 1be non-philosophical
break must be called "epistemic " rather than "epistemological"
because all epistemological relations or relations of the logos
involve a unitary synthesis and unitary break.

every philosophical decision programs its break with the pre­
ceding state of philosophy, science, culture, etc. th is break is in­
scribed into the structure of the philosophical dyad and then
into synthetic or systematic unity itself. it can take on local forms,
specified according to various doctrines, for example the "rup­
ture" (bachelard), the "epistemological break" (althusser) , but
also the difference-break (deleuze), the differance-rupture (der­
rida) , the l iteral cut (lacan, etc.). this specification depends upon
what overdetermines the properly philosophical break ("scien­
tific practice," "pathos of distance" or affect of j udaic alterity, etc.).
after having elaborated an "epistemic break" that separates
first science (of the one) from philosophy, non-philosophy
has complicated and displaced this distinction. 1 . every
phenomenon of rupture or break is second in relation to
the real, in relation to vision-in-one, and not first as it is in
philosophical decision. or if it is "first," this is in the radical
and not absolute sense of non-philosophy: first operation of
thought but not an operation of the real.the "epistemologi­
cal break" instead remains under the ultimate authority of
philosophy despite the "driving" force of science's rupture
in relation to ideology, a force that still proceeds too simply
through a reversal of hierarchy. 2 . every non-philosophical
break or cut finds its element in the oldest duality of phi­
losophy and the real, a duality each time articulated by a
certain type of foreclosure. 3 . to the extent that a break
exists in non-philosophy, it is in the same proportion not
so much "first" as simply relevant to the a priori-and not
transcendental-instance that "terminates" the constitu­
tion of force (of) thought. the latter is distance or exterior­
ity-non-positional and non-decisional (of) self-and thus
is distinguished from the decision-decisional (of) self-of
philosophy. 4. non-philosophical decision is determined-in­
the-last-instance by the undecided (of the) real, whereas
philosophy is intertwined with the undecidable (to various
degrees of irreducibility). this is what distinguishes a tran­
scendental-axiomatic decision, break or abstraction from
its philosophical forms. 5 . the non-philosophical type of a
priori break is not what globally distinguishes non-philoso­
phy from philosophy-this distinction is real from the start,
then transcendental and inseparable from the uni-versality
of vision-in-one-but is the organon of this dual distinction.

#chora
sense (of) identity of philosophical faith supposed the real
when vision-in-one transforms it into its correlate (unilate) or
gives it its sense (oj) identity. chora is the place that philosophy
has become (as identity) th rough unilateralization by claiming
to be the real (although not as transcendental unity). it is the
phenomenon or given-without-givenness (oj) this real halluci­
nation.

chara designates spatial emplacement, and by extension the
receptacle, even i ncluding the primo materio with which it be­
comes conflated under the name of chaos, thereby generati ng
the dialectic of the one and the multiple that develops from the
dialectic of the one and being. chara is the place of a pure mul­
tiplication: when chaos becomes the sensible man ifold after its
ideal ist reduction, chora becomes its transcendental condition as
spatiality. and even in certain philosophers a name for a particu lar
mixture of the transcendental and the empirical, the . . . feminine.

vision-in-one is the given and gives-without-givenness .
its first correlate (we should say: its first uni-late) is
that which it manifests or extracts from the first object to
which it is opposed and which is philosophy: not as doc­
trine or system, but as faith-in-the-real that ultimately sup­
poses itself to be the real. philosophy is not simply the
place of its doctrines and of all beings, a universal place; it is
the total place, that which envelops itself and thus can only
believe itself to be the real or the absolute place, includ­
ing its self-knowledge. vision-in-one can do nothing but ex­
clude this belief or more specifically lift its supposed valid­
ity. but it also gives this belief without givenness in the form
it extracts, that of an identity or a sense (of) identity, that of
the identity (of) this place.the theoretical illusion and sup­
posed validity is lifted, but not the materiality of this belief
that is consubstantial with philosophy. chara will be called
not this spontaneously self-knowing place, which is philoso­
phy in the totality of its claim, but what vision-in-one sees
in this claim, including the reduced identity (of the) philo­
sophical place. unlike that of the philosophical imagination,
this ch6ra is not an emplacement of the spatial order. in the
order of the sense (of) identity (of the " noema "), ch6ra is the
instance that determines-in-the-last-instance the other philo­
sophical contents (which are more specific and constitute
the structure of philosophical decision), at least as given-in­
one and reduced to their sense (of) identity. by virtue of its
acting, the one thus determines a more originary or more
transcendental site that is also foreign to every topo-logy,
where the world and its contents, the authorities and philo­
sophical decisions themselves will be emplaced.
as an expression of the one's being-separated/given, the
ch6ra is "unilateralized" ; it is a position-non-positional (of)
self-of the world that can never be dialectized, topologized
or scanned by a transversal gaze. in effect the one is indif­
ferent to what it determines because the one determines
it both in-the-last-instance and by its being-foreclosed. the
ch6ra is the absence of all reciprocal determination, all uni­
tary correlation of contraries and all sufficient philosophy.
it is more than an a priori: if the real is nowhere, utop­
ic, it ultimately gives a real place (in-the-last-instance . . . )
to philosophy. the real no longer magically springs from
philosophy's head but is where philosophy itself finds its
emplacement. instead of constituting an (anti-)thetic a prio­
ri susceptible to being coupled, which would only be at the
price of some " infinite task" or " differance" with its philo­
sophical contrary within some unitary dyad of the one and
the other*, the chora is the extreme counterpart of vision-in­
one, that which, without forming a relation or correlation
but a unilation, "faces" it toward philosophical faith. chora
defines par excellence the object of worl*d-thought, for it is
the latter's first determination.

#definition
identity-in-the-last-instance of a proper name and a first term.

the definition posits the equivalence of a "word" and a com­
bination of other words such that they explicate the significa­
tion of the fi rst. the theory of the definition is historical ly rich
and complex, passing through pascal. leibniz and gergonne . the
important works of the end of the 1 9th century and the be­
ginning of the 20th century pertaining to numbers and sets of
numbers have al lowed us to specify the characteristics of defini­
tions through abstraction, above al l that of inductive definitions;
works pertaining to the concept of distance in geometry have
expl icated what is called definition by postulates. definitions can
be classified either according to a "structural" point of view, ac­
cording to how they concern an individual ("nominal" definitions)
or according to how they involve a structure or a property ( defi­
nition "by postulates"); either according to a more metaphysi­
cal criterion, how they give the rule of production of what they
define ("real" defi n itions) or how they are admitted as purely
conventional ("nominal" definitions). this double acceptance of
the nominal definition has allowed for the most complex transi­
tions in the tradition between the individual, the real and the
conventional.
in non-philosophy, definitions do not play the same role
as in philosophy, where their operation as conventional
equivalence supposes the system's unitary closure. non­
philosophy posits the identity-in-the-last-instance of the
philosophical system and of the individual, or better yet of
the conventional and the effective, since its problem is not
that of knowing whether or not a definition is pertinent
for the real. it dualyzes classical definitions by affirming the
identity-in-the-last-instance of two heterogeneous functions:
the name of the one and the first term. it thus assures the
non-formalist nature of transcendenta*l axiomatics which
guarantees that the first term is obtained by rules of trans­
formation on the basis of relatively autonomous materials
(philosophical, ethical, aesthetic, technical, mystical, etc.).
the non-philosophical definition functions on the tran­
scendental level, which does not affect the one but is said
according to it in the occasion of a "being" that is related­
in-the-last-instance to it. the definition thus participates in
the contingency of this being, but it is conventional to the
extent that it is a name according to identity. it is implicit
as a name according to the one and its clones, which are
only explicit due to the way in which the first term and
its conceptual symbol are obtained. the non-philosophical
definition thus receives some of the opacity and mystery of
the one. it does not deny the philosophical definition but
emplaces it in effectivity by giving it a new function: no
longer simply to give a signification to the operation of a
quasi-closed system, but to make possible a dictionary from
one philosophy to another and consequently a dictionary of
translations between various systems. this expansion of the
philosophical definition by non-philosophy's implicit defi­
nition is one of the elements that contribute to non-philo­
sophical poetics and " artificial philosophy." a dictionary of
non-philosophy utilizes this generalization of classical defi­
nitions because it begins with philosophical material as its
point of departure; but it also entrusts them with an implicit
function that no effectivity can account for.

#democracy
internal form of non-philosophical thought as unified theory
of philosophy and a parlicular region. here democracy is not
an onect of thought or reflection but the essence of knowledges
produced byforce (oj) thought or in-the-last-instance by vision­
in-one, which protects the transcendental equality of unified
terms against any spirit of hierarchy. non-philosophy is a tran­
scendental theory of human multitudes and of the manner
in which humans of-the-last-instance are in-body, but it takes
as its material philosophical inequality in general and in par­
ticular the typical ego-xenological difference ofphilosophy.

when it stud ies pol itics and democracy more specifically, phi lo­
sophical decision poses the question of the relation to be es­
tablished between ind ividuals, but on the basis of the world or
the city and as belonging to the world. this relation signals the
reciprocity among parties and the appearance of equality bound
to reciprocity. thus historically speaking, modern democracy is
established by the idea of a social contract (rousseau). i n general,
the problem of democracy is bound to that of the management
of contractual and intersubjective situations. certainly, the struc­
ture of the problem wi l l be different according to whether one
proceeds from greco-european being-in-the-world (heidegger)
or from the " most-h igh" (levinas) of the other*.the democratic
question of the contract, and which is also a question of the social
bond, can be complexified into that of a communicational action
(habermas) , that of anti-nihilistic grand politics (nietzsche) or
that of a political overdetermination of the last instance (althuss­
er). but in each philosophical scenario, equal ity through reciproc­
ity or difference subtends philosophical hierarchy. just as the most
"abstract" equality subtends philosophy's own spirit of inequality.
philosophy. or "worl*d-thought," is an objective democratic ap­
pearance and a real anti-democracy.
the philosophers' political thought mimics human struggles
and thus cannot explain them.the problem of a philosophy
of democracy no longer has any rigorous meaning except
as human. a mode of non hierarchized and non anarchistic
democracy presupposes a unilateral duality: i . . . am (and not
"is"), thus i am an other*, a democratic multitude, a stranger.
the stranger is not the other* encountered in the space
of the world or as infinite, but myself in-the-last-instance.
this is the transcendental organon of the ego, its acting in
the occasion of the world and the absolute condition of
democracy.
the stranger "makes" the void; it transcendentally anes­
thetizes all types of (psychological, sociological) con­
ditioning. the void is also fully positive qua identity of
universal law, which is itself in flesh and blood. the con­
tent of this void is precisely a transcendental multitude,
a non-auto-positional democracy. neither playing upon the
logo-logical center nor upon the margins or inequalities, de­
mocracy in this way destabilizes and utilizes authoritarian
autopositions, which are henceforth made secondary. the
theoretico-pragmatic human-in-the-last-instance is substi­
tuted for the violence of the democratic state and its philo­
sophical expressions.

#desire
for non-psychoanalysis, designates the side of reality of enjoy­
ment or jouissance, which is itself determined by the real or
enjoyed-without-enjoyment, i.e. joui-sans-jouissance . deprived
of its philosophical essence of self-desire or desire of the other*'s
desire, it loses its determining role that it received with philoso­
phy through plato and with psychoanalysis through lacan.

at least when it is not understood as a mask of the wil l-as
in the classical, specifically thomist trad ition or in kant as hav­
ing its destination in this mask that would constitute its superior
form-desire is often defined as the essence of man: either in its
simple form (spinoza) , in the reflected or redoubled form of a
desire-of-desire (kojeve) or ultimately in the triadic form medi­
ated by representation (plato, girard). i n the desire of hegelian
recogn ition, "the two falls out of three" because recognition is
constituted in relation to the idea of man who intervenes in the
third position among the animals that protect themselves, given
that hegelian desire is the consequence of l ife.
i n psychoanalysis desire is itself triad ic, which makes it prudent
to discern here: either in freud, the representation of affect (since
desire itself differs from the former as wel l as the latter because
representation is not l ibidinal as such, and anxiety, for example,
consists i n a non desiring and even undesirable affect); or in lacan,
the object of the cause. the cause of desire is the castration of
the "subject"; the object is contingent. desire-"not giving up on
one's desire" (lacan)-founds the ethics of psychoanalysis.
albeit in different senses, verdiglione and deleuze dissociate
desire and castration: the former; because he situates desire and
jouissance (whose condition is castration) on opposite sides of
the unconscious; the latter; since he rejects law and castration in
general, on the contrary affirms the plenitude of desire identified
with creativity and subtracts it from the lack to which, on the
contrary, all psychoanalysis submits it.
"non-analytic" desire is " simplified" because it finds its non­
platonic essence in the non-auto-positional transcendence
of the other*'s jouissance or affect in the sense that non­
philosophy understands it; like it, desire has its condition
in the enjoyed or real-of-the-last-instance. its transcendence
constitutes it as the desire (ot) the other*. lacan holds it in
a redundant structure, for the desire (ot) desire testifies not
only to his affiliation with kojeve but also to the structure
of the philosophico-analytic mixture in general, where the
philosophy of desire obviously has a privileged place. de­
sire cannot escape from philosophical and psychoanalyti­
cal authority unless its cause is no longer the real as lack
or castration, but the enjoyed-without-enjoyment insofar as
the latter determines it in-the-last-instance.
in effect, desire finds its identity in jouissance with the
syntax that belongs to the unconscious itself. this identity
defetishizes it and dismantles its relation with repetition,
difterance, the letter and the symbolic as they have been
advanced by restrained deconstruction, which situates its
post-lacanism in the idea of a constitutive alterity and a
one insufficient to itself in the mode of an "i desire, thus
you enjoy." relating it with its essence of the non-auto-po­
sitional other* dismantles the circle of desire and untethers
thought from phantasmatic desire: enjoyed loss-as freud
calls it-of the hallucinatory object of satisfaction. a loss
which grounds neither a "hysteria" of identification nor a
traditional lack of desire (in aphanisis), nor the unconscious
insistence on incest as in schizoanalysis. desire is not desir­
ing (ot) self or (ot) the desire-of-the-other* by its essence;
it is instead a clone enjoyed-in-the-real, even if it is cloned
from philosophico-analytic desire.

#determination-in-the-last-instance
along with the one-in-one, non-philosophy 's central concept
that distinguishes it from all philosophies. it is said of the one 's
causality as such or vision-in-one, of the real in virtue of its pri­
macy over thought and its objects (like being). this causality is
exerted upon that which is given as non (-one) and that which
serves as experience or data for thought-according-to-the-one:
a causality exerted upon philosophy itself qua experience-form
of the world and upon the universal noematic structures or the
theoretical knowledge that is unleashed by itfrom this material.
it is therefore also the specific causality of non-philosophy in
general. tbis concept has a marxist origin and is here extracted
from historical materialism, transferred and radicalized into
first science or according to the one, which gives it its radical
sense and allows for its full utilization (it should rigorously be
called: givenness-in-the-last-instance).

the du has only witnessed several stifled attempts in philosophy,
whose most complete concept of causality is the category of re­
ciprocal determ ination that is decisive for philosophical systems
with its immediate modes (reciprocity, convertibil ity, reversibility,
systematicity) and its more remote mediate modes, namely the
four forms of causality distinguished by aristotle which them­
selves instead arise from the causal ity of being (agent, end, form,
matter) rather than from the one. the real, which is not being,
thus has its original mode of efficacy, whereas thought-accord­
ing-to-the-one or non-philosophy is distinguished from the du
of any ontology and simultaneously excludes-at least in its es­
sence-finality, formal ism, materialism and technologism.
the dli is not simply an immanent causality but radical im­
manence itself-le. that which distinguishes it from any
"spinozist" immanence or any immanence derived from
spinozism. reciprocal determination and the dli are dis­
tinguished in many ways. 1) in the first case, causality is
divided between two terms (cause and effect) that belong
to an ontological or ontico-ontological ensemble or couple;
in the second case it is attributed to one of these alone:
the effect then supposes a passive object, a simply occa­
sional ("occasionale") "receptacle " of this causality. 2) this
occasion is already reduced to the moment when it is mani­
fested and thus deprived of determining or real action in
return. the dli therefore supposes a unilateral, not recip­
rocal, duality of causes. 3) in the first case, causality goes
in two opposite yet circular or infinitely convergent direc­
tions (action/reaction; real opposition; dialectical contradic­
tion; differential relations of two terms, etc.); and in the sec­
ond case, causality goes in a single direction (from the real
toward the effectivity of worl*d-thought; from immanence
toward transcendence) . 4) in the first case, it supposes an
alienating continuity and an identification of the cause with
a supposed given other term; in the second, cause is not
alienated in its effect but-since it is merely a universal nega­
tive condition-supposes a functional transcendental agen­
cy or instance through which the real can be said to act.
this rigorously irreversible nature excludes the con­
cerns of a "linear" causality, since "mechanistic" causality is
always de jure invertible and dialectizable by philosophy,
as is shown by the constant philosophical reinterpretations
of historical materialism which are simply a hodgepodge
of re-normalizations. the necessity of dli is understood in
terms of the essence of the one: how can a radical imma­
nence, which does not escape from itself or alienate itself,
act upon an exteriority or a non (-one)? there is no causal­
ity of the one except for responding to an occasional cause
or exteriority.thus for example, if a thought adequate to the
one or according-to-the-real must exist, then it will neces­
sarily be thrown back outside the one itself or outside its
essence without the latter alienating itself in this represen­
tation. this throwback is the primitive form of the follow­
ing deduction: if a non (-one) exists, then it-either it or
its clones-comes radically after the one itself and cannot
constitute a premise of the latter.the recourse for this argu­
ment is the radical immanence of the one, which is here
not simply its essence that could be surveyed and treated
as an object but the performed point of view where the
argumentation and who argues (the one itself in-the-last-in­
stance) are joined together.when the one is taken as point
of view for a thought that can only emanate or proceed
from it, then this thought is posited after the one as its ma­
terial and as what has already supported the efficacy of the
one. "last-instance " means that the one is the real unique
cause, whatever the distance of the effect or the mediations
that separate it from the one might be: a cause that reason­
ing or description never abandons and never surreptitiously
objectifies by putting it in a faceoff (= dyad) with anoth­
er given. the cause is always-already experienced through
the one or " in-one" -this is the radical performativity of
immanence-or has always-already sustained its efficacy.
vision-in-one and dli describe the same phenomenon.

thus it will be said of the one and every given = x: the one
and x are not the same, but identical in-the-last-instance.
non-philosophy's destruction of the universal claims of
philosophy's parmenidean matrix guarantees the radical
autonomy of the one and the relative autonomy of world­
thought. dli is the causality of philosophically unforesee­
able (undefinable and indemonstrable) theoretical and prag­
matic emergence.
now what should be understood by this throwback or
foreclosure outside the one and by the one of every giv­
en = x and of thought in particular? the efficacy of dli is
double: 1) it invalidates or suspends the theoretical author­
ity (claim to knowledge of the real) of philosophy-form as
circularity (variously open and distended according to the
philosophies): this is unilateralization in the strict sense of
the word; 2) it imprints the mark of the one or of identity
upon the content or manifold of philosophy-form itself (its
material): this is uni-identification. this vision of philoso­
phy-form "in" and "from" the one, which remains in itself
without identifying with its object, is the "cloning" of non­
philosophy on the basis of the one. cloning is expressed by
various operations or operatory rules that concern the radi­
cal identity at the core of philosophical decision (its dyadic
duality of terms and its unity, the fabric of relations, the thet­
ic and auto-positional disjunctions and syntheses, etc . that
internally structure it). this quasi-operatory side of the one
can be called noetic, even though it is not exerted through
any intentionality of consciousness. it consists in relating
every given to the one-of-the-last-instance and in describ­
ing its being-lived or its (transcendental, aprioristic) identi­
ties insofar as they are cloned from it. on the other hand,
the phenomenal state of affairs that is grasped when it is
reduced to its sense (ot) identity ("philosophy")-i.e. sense
of occasion and foreclosure of the real-will be called no­
ematic. this sense of philosophy-form as grasped in-identity
takes on different forms according to the levels or moments
considered in philosophy-form. dli does not, for example,
exclude noetico-noematic duality, but simply its origin in
consciousness or being and its aspect of infinitely revers­
ible bi-lateral correlation.

#distance
non-autopositional a priori extracted from the autopositional
transcendence ofphilosophy that constitutes the last noetic de­
termination offorce (o.fj thought or of the stranger-subject.

the concept of distance implicitly functions as a general rule
within "philosophical distinctions"; for example, as a rule concern­
ing the distinction between the given, which is imposed upon the
establishment of a philosophy (the "present," the "contemporary,"
the "inauthentic," etc.), and the empirical, which is suitable for "its"
transcendental. it is a critical (in the distinction of specific spaces,
since the philosophical theories of geometrical space are always
the result of the superposition of various sensible, geometric,
physical, euclidean, non-euclidean spaces) and synthetic concept
(which re-articulates the divisions of the empirical and therefore
the place of every schematism). from the point of view of aes­
thetic reason, distance is presupposed by metaphor and the nul­
lification of metaphor in catachresis. this is the protection a phi­
losophy is granted by rhetoric against an overly individuated style.
from the point of view of practical reason, there exists a distance,
never completely identifiable or known, that separates us not
only from inauthentic values but also from their cause, radical
evil. post-husserl ian phenomenology has made explicit usage of
the minimal "phenomenological distance" of phenomena or rep­
resentations (max scheler; michel henry) in the "return to things
themselves." deconstructions have exacerbated the necessity of
distance in the non topological mode of delay or d ifferance, par­
ticularly in the form of metaphor of metaphor; thus revealing that
no distance is evaluable in philosophy (topology) or in its margins,
but that it is "unavoidable" for understanding the "gestures" of
philosophy (its mixtures, its distinctions, its operations).
the real a s given-without-givenness excludes any "phe­
nomenological distance" and its modes (nothingness, dis­
tinction, division, transcendence, alterity, etc.). it radically
limits the philosophical importance of distance . even the
determination-in-the-last-instance of philosophy proceeds
without resorting to it. distance only appears as noesis
(in the structure of force (of) thought) and noema (in the
correlate- " unilate" -of this structure), which correspond,
obviously in the non-autopositional mode, to transcendence
as the essence of philosophizing and more specifically as
the essence of apriority. it is then determined-in-the-last-in­
stance by the real and takes on the noetic form of a "non­
phenomenological distance" deprived of its autopositional
doublet. it is designated in general as non-autopositional ex­
teriority or distance (nap-d) and constitutes the a priori
element that contributes to force (of) thought or that gives
it its capacity as organon.

#drive
other* name for force (o.fj thought as organon of the one and
for its pragmatic type of acting on the world or philosophy-ma­
terial.

the notion of "drive" is consecrated by psychoanalysis rather
than by its philosophico-psychological equivalents (as tendency,
and notably as altruistic tendency with maurice pradines) . i n
psychoanalysis, this notion concerns a "borderl ine" concept that
freud situates at the limit of the psychic and the somatic when it
isn't lost in the labyrinth of metapsychological mythology. i n any
case, the most exact equivalent of (sexual, death) drive would be
the physical image-concept of force, which is itself valorized by
freud. from this perspective, it would be interesting to ask what
a drive would become, i n the psychoanalytic sense, if it were no
longer understood as a force, in the sense of pre-relativistic im­
agery, but as a field: perhaps, as certain analysts have suggested, as
a function (of repression, of resistance).
force (of) thought (or drive in the first forms of non-philos­
ophy) receives its capacity of force/drive from its cloned
nature (not clone of the one but of the world as seen-in­
one ). the clone is not distinct from the one, for it is the
uni-versality of the one effectuated by a givenness. there­
fore the clone itself through one of its aspects is one-in­
one, radical immanence. consequently, the clones in ques­
tion here-the transcendental and a priori instances-are
radical immanence through one of their "faces" ; through
another face, they are for the former instance, (transcenden­
tal) relation-without-relation to the world, and, for the latter
instance, relation of transcendence or (aprioristic) exterior­
ity to this same world. force (of) thought is intrinsically an
acting and a pragmatics of worl*d-thought. this drive is de­
prived of negativity or means of representation and ignores
the play of forces as well as the functions that would involve
it in transcendence or in the logico-real order. it constitutes
thought or reason into an action without principle-but
not without cause-and "attains" the world in its identity.
this is not an immediate given but rather a given-without­
givenness of action as the ultimate transcendental residue
of activity as mediation. the one is effectuated as driven.
drive is the other* or the unconscious, whereas in its psy­
choanalytic sense, drive is the mark of the other*.

#dual
fundamental matrix of non-philosophy that de.fines a general
order founded upon the being-foreclosed of the one; source of
irreversibility and unilaterality between the experience of the
immanence of the one and the object to which it is foreclosed,
the world. whereas the dual is still not unilateral duality (which
sets cloning in play), it is opposed par excellence to philosophy 's
form as mixture founded upon reversibility and reciprocity.

the dual has witnessed several attem pts in logic and algebra. it
was also attempted and missed by philosophy in the form of a
dyad between man and world, being and non-being, being and
nothingness, etc. but these contraries are unified in a synthesis or
a unity. phenomenology tried to elucidate it with the idea of a
parallelism between noesis and noema. nevertheless, this h us­
serl ian form merely divides the duality of subject and object by
internalizing it and replicating it. the ensemble forms two pairs
of terms that cannot avoid redundancy: on the one hand, the
subject-object pair of the natural attitude; on the other hand,
the noesis-noema pair of the red uced transcendental attitude.
trying to surpass a so-called natural d uality, husserl doubles the
dual function through the heroic synthesis of these two elements
in a noetico-noematic correlation that simulates rad ical imma­
nence. thus, there are in philosophy certain attempts to explain
the concept of the dual, but these initiatives fall short because
the dual ity of the two terms is always thought accord i ng to a
reciprocity-which is reversible at the limit-and not according to
a more originary foreclosure.the one and the world are neit her
really distinguished as two terms radically "separated" by a fore­
closure, nor unilateralized by the specific causal relationship which
follows from this, i.e. that of determination-in-the-last-instance. de­
spite certain attempts at unilaterality (difference) , the structural
mode of philosophical decision is on the contrary that of the uni­
tary or the reversible (reciprocal, convertible) unity of contraries.
for non-philosophy, the dual is a key concept that allows it to
be distinguished from philosophy. from the start, it signifies
the existence, not so much of a double givenness but of the
duality of the given-without-givenness and of givenness: of
the one and the mixture of the world.anterior to any synthe­
sis and unitary analysis, this "duality" of experiences is formu­
lated in terms of foreclosure: the given-without-givenness is
foreclosed to the givenness-of-the-given, and the latter in turn
forecloses the former in another less originary way.
the dual therefore implies an "epistemic" break between
non-philosophy and philosophy. not only in its way of think­
ing (according to the one-real or man), but also in the will to
freedom of the essence of thought. due to its real and tran­
scendental essence non-philosophy is not decidable by phi­
losophy; it possesses a "radical;' albeit relative, autonomy of
thought that it receives from the non-sufficiency of its cause.
ultimately the dual engenders an order characterized by
its irreversibility. it aligns the duality of man or of his instances
in a relation of unilaterality.this relation of causality is formu­
lated in terms of determination-in-the-last-instance or "unilat­
eral duality." it makes possible both the reduction of philoso­
phy to the state of contingent given occasion and therefore a
non-philosophical science of philosophy. by situating the real
place of the different protagonists (science, philosophy . . . ),
the dual introduces an opening of universal thought aligned
with the real alone.
it is important to distinguish between the dual, duality
and dualism. since it has a rea*l essence, the dual excludes du­
alism as a philosophico-religious decision in transcendence.
(unilateral) duality is established between the world-occa­
sion and the clones of the real, but not with the one itself.
lastly, dualism supposes a first duality or syntax, and thus a
philosophical position.

#science
one of the objects of first science or unified theory of thought;
that through which the latter is a theory of science and not sim­
ply a theory ofphilosophy; that through which it also is distin­
guishedfrom the philosophical reduction ofscience to its knowl­
edges.

philosophy recognizes an essence for science or the sciences only
in the classical, i.e. metaphysical form (plato; husserl: the idea of
science) ; then in the nihilistic or degraded forms of an essence
that denies itself: the sciences as formations of knowledge-power
(foucault); as laboratory micro-societies, objects of a sociology;
as techno-sciences, reduced to the technical and losing their the­
oretical specificity; as the formula: "science does not exist, only
the sciences exist," etc. in all these modes, even the most vu lgar;
philosophy sti l l claims to announce science's essence in itself.
among other tasks, first science, or unified theory of sci­
ence and philosophy, proposes to determine the sciences'
essence (of) science. such an object is therefore not philo­
sophical. it forms the hypothesis-which is also "unified,"
both scientific and philosophical-that this essence (of)
science is distinct from any solely philosophical type of es­
sence, for it finds in the one-real the cause that determines
it in-the-last-instance .to this end, it requires the philosophy
of the sciences or epistemologies but only as occasion or
material: it contests the validity of their type of hypotheses
but uses them on condition of their invalidation. philosophy
merely posits an essence that is produced and masterable
by itself, thus denying science any scientifically knowable
essence, requiring the remainder of the regional knowledg­
es or empirical theories to isolate their processes of pro­
duction and to serve as supports for the essence of substi­
tution it projects onto the sciences. non-philosophy is the
refusal of this operation; it radically distinguishes between
essence (of) science (since non-philosophy itself as science
is capable of determining due to its specific nature) and
the knowledges that it produces on its behalf. essence (of)
science is therefore no longer this mixture of ontological
decision and of the local knowledges which philosophy rei­
fies or fetishizes, and which, from plato to heidegger it has
projected into the sciences, denying any autonomy to them
and dooming them to their nihilist destiny which is foreign
to thought in its identity.
first science has a guiding formula in common with the
philosophy-of-science: "the science of science in general"
(fichte), or even the "absolute science" that contains the
foundations of the other sciences (husserl). but while phi­
losophy and epistemology circularly interpret the relation
of science-subject and science-object by reducing the latter
to facts of knowledge, first science discovers the object that
conceals or silences this formula and that philosophy does
not see because it does not see: "the science of the identity
of or essence (of) science." it reestablishes the real object of
a theory of science and reduces the philosophical or episte­
mological mixtures to the state of material; the latter helps,
this time in operations of a "unified" type, first science de­
termine the identity that science comprises. this identity is
therefore no longer one of these abstract generalities with
which epistemology surveys the sciences and claims to safe­
guard their essence while merely annihilating it.
the essence (of) science appears in two associated forms.
on the side of the real, it appears as force (of) thought inso­
far as it is the identity-in-the-last-instance of theory (science)
and pragmatics (philosophy), such that force (of) thought is
not subject-(of/for)-science without also being subject-(of/
for)-philosophy. on the side of the object, it appears as iden­
tity or sense (of) identity of the philosophy of the sciences
or that of epistemo-logical difference, etc.

#europanalysis
phenomenological method of auto-analysis within the internal
(one). neighboring doctrine of non-philosophy, also referring
to the one but by other axioms that comprehend it as inter­
nal. 'these axioms do not constitute a non-phenomenology or a
non-philosophy ofphenomenology but posit the possibility of a
thought and of a language of the one (and not simply accord­
ing to the one).

all the phi losophical investigations (includ ing husserl's) about
the concept of europe-not to menti on its corresponding
mythologies-constitute "europe-philosophy," i.e. a synthetic­
not analytic-mode of approach to this concept itself, and must
be surpassed.
the non-methodological point of departure for europanaly­
sis (s. valdinoci) is the immanence of impression. together
these notions separate it from phenomenology-which is
really nothing but a methodology-and empiricism. both of
these notions in fact repose upon the concept of the inter­
nal, which is completely foreign, for example, to hume . fur­
thermore, indifferent to the rupture of inside and outside,
the internal-immanent and impressive-determines a new
regime of thought, for example concave or opposed to the
convexity of philosophy.
if philosophy is a thought-space marked by perceptual
duality, it is a question of passing from perception-and
from the conception with which it pairs-to endoception,
a fundamental europanalytical notion. endoception as in­
ternal intuition is tact without contact or without spatial
distantiation, disidealized intuition without ch6ra, since the
latter is replaced by internal chaos.
here identity becomes a complex identity that harbors
an internal universe-veritably distinct from the cosmologi­
cal universe as well as schellingian psychocosmism. as an
open, fractured or fractalized identity, it offers itself up to
method by zigzagging as representation of the unrepresent­
able through an impressive language that can be transmit­
ted far and wide.
the hypothesis of an impressive language or an internal
speech leads to affirming the identity of analysis bearing on
the real and of the auto-analysis of the real: this is precisely
"immense man." europanalysis from then on skirts alongside
psychoanalysis, for which everything is also internal since it
abstracts from the sexual drive.
europanalysis declares itself distinct from and comple­
mentary to non-philosophy to the extent that, instead of
claiming to be a first science where the syntax of language
is uprooted by the foreclosure of the real, it endeavors to­
ward a prescience or a genealogy of science through an im­
pressive language. moreover, by affirming through analyti­
cal induction the identity of the last instance of givenness
and reduction, it abolishes one of the a prioris of formal
ontology; on the other hand, radicalizing the concept of
one-multiple obtained by the fractalization of generalized
deconstruction, it incorporates the other* with the one,
which, through integralization, then become the open. in­
differently, at the limit: open of universe or ef-fect, open
of man or af-fect. an ultimate difference then certainly
separates europanalysis from an idealist philosophy: this
is because, rejecting the concept of synthesis, it does not
attempt the autogivenness of an absolute open, which as
signifier-so little does it admit language insofar as it is an
external relation-would have also thrown it back into psy­
choanalytical alterity.

#experimentation
effectuation of the system of non-philosophy 's hypotheses by the
object ''philosophy " as reduced to the state of occasion (symp­
tomatic indication, nomination, cloning) . the experimenta­
tion of non-philosophy neither verifies norfalsifies it but effectu­
ates it as "simple " hypothesis determined-in-the-last-instance by
the real.

an experimental thought exists only by excess or passages to the
limit: hegel experiments with kant's conception of experience,
but idealizes it and extracts from the transcendental appearance
a dialectic of the logos. in his read ing of kant, heidegger experi­
ments with the ontological status of temporal ity on the basis of
the experience of inner sense. correlating hypothesis and exper­
imentation in a mixture, philosophy renders them convertible at
the limit and ultimately knows neither the one nor the other or
ignores them in their identity. despite the epistemological discus­
sions about the necessity or irrelevance of experimentation and
its status, the sciences offer a more concrete conception of ex­
perimentation. in effect, after the concept of"crucial experience"
(bacon)-which is stil l phi losophical-has been relativized, the
sciences proceed by perpetual experimentation either toward
verification or falsification.
while non-philosophy conserves the identity of the hy­
pothesis form and prevents it from philosophically con­
verting with the real-whether by verification (logical
empiricism), or by falsification (critical epistemology) or
by absolute identification (hegel and nietzsche, for exam­
ple)-it also conserves the necessity and relative autonomy
of experimentation. but it suspends the philosophical sense
of these latter: experience (here philosophy) is necessary
but limited to its function of occasion, material, symptom,
etc. there is no transcendental non-philosophy exterior to
the field of philosophy as its object, but the transcendental
is no longer determined in its very essence by this object
(the " occasionale" cause).
experimentation indeed has effects of verification and
falsification of non-philosophy, more specifically of its an­
terior hypotheses as invested in another philosophical ma­
terial. but contrary to what happens with philosophical
hypotheses, experimentation does not realize those of non­
philosophy but effectuates them in their conditions of exis­
tence without alienating them from it. it respects and thus
confirms the status of non-philosophy to be a hypothesis
precisely because it is determined-and protected-in-the­
last-instance by vision-in-one .when transcendental thought
is aligned with the real, it requires more than ever an exper­
imentation relative to its conditions of existence (against
platonism and its "divagation,'' kant) yet resists it more than
ever and does not progressively fall into it. it affirms the
unilateral duality of the transcendental and the empirical,
of force (of) thought and experimentation, and thus avoids
epistemological (positivist, critical, etc.) and philosophi­
cal (realist, idealist, " absolute," etc.) solutions, which are all
founded on their de jure convertibility (more or less ap­
proximately with a verification, a falsification, a rectification
. . . more or less approximately with a "labor" of adequation).
by making experimentation pass from the epistemological
status to the " occasionale" status, transcendental thought
untethers it from philosophical idealism simultaneously as
it unleashes the transcendental from the empirico-transcen­
dental circle.

#first name
symbolic element of transcendenta*l axiomatics formed on the
basis of a philosophical concept and entering into the constitu­
tion of the axioms that describe the one.

a first term is that wh ich resists any regress according to aris­
totle's requirement. it can be related to other terms either by
definition or by a system of principles. in philosophy. first terms
can present the hope of breaking the circularity of commence­
ment and at least of introducing an appearance of deductive rig­
or into it against its "hermeneutic" penchant-which can include
the cogito as axiom belonging to a quasi-mathematical order of
reasons or the first notions posited by spinozist defi nitions. but
these attempts arise from an ontological axiomatics to the extent
that every philosophy remains structured as a metaphysics.these
terms thus in fact remain intuitive (intellectual intuition) and can
at any moment be rei ntroduced into the philosophical circle of
the given and the demonstrated, of prem ises and consequences.
when a term no longer results from a conceptual and meta­
physical abstraction but from a truly axiomatic (albeit non­
formal) abstraction, i.e. when it is related to the one-in-one
in-the-last-instance, deployed on the basis of the philosophi­
cal concept by force (of) thought and referred to this intui­
tive usage of the concept but deprived of its philosophical
sense, it is "formalized" and "symbolized" in a transcenden­
tal and first manner par excellence. non-philosophy' s first
terms, which principally describe the one and the subject­
force (of) thought, are doubly first: due to their solely axiom­
atic abstraction as well as their transcendental status.
these are first names, but in-the-last-instance, even when
they are said of the one, the real, etc. except in onto-theo-lo­
gy, there are no absolutely proper names, only those that are
proper radically or solely in-the-last-instance.this is why, due
to their philosophical occasion or extraction, they have an as­
pect of representational, regional-and-fundamental content,
but, due to their rea*l essence-their identity (of) concept, a
non-conceptual identity-they are indifferent to philosophi­
cal hierarchies and to the deconstruction or dissemination
of the latter. any philosophical concept whatsoever, in ap­
proximation with an intraphilosophical interpretation that
brings it back to the transcendentals and ultimately to the
" one" which it can always serve to describe, can be treated
as a first name and inserted into the axioms. in this sense,
first names are the result of the cloning of philosophy's
words by the one-of-the-last-instance. these are no longer
the mixtures of language and being that are said of the meta­
physical one under the aegis of the reversibility of words
and things. they no longer designate the inherence of the
referent to the word either from the point of view of perfor­
mativity (analytic philosophies) or from the point of view of
the "mystical" (wittgenstein). they result from a usage that
could be called "mystical-in-the-last-instance," according to
the one and not only when they are said of the one. these
proper or first names arise from a transcendental and uni­
versal pragmatics that produces them as non-conceptual
symbols on the basis of the conceptual material.

#force (of) thought
organon or the means through which the one can enact or
possess a causality without being alienated in the material of its
action. instance which is not real like the one but produced by
cloning. transcendental and aprioristic, it has its rea*l essence
in the one without adding anything to or subtracting anything
from the real itself, which determines it in-the-last-instance
relative to an occasion .

marxism recogn izes a n equ ivalent concept which i t places at the
foundation of historical materialism: labor power or force de tra­
vail. this is an energetic concept since human energy only exists
in the personality of the worker and is i rreducible to his functions
or operations, i.e. to the work produced or accompl ished. energy
is required to transform the object of work into exchange value;
thus it is creative of value. on the plane of marxist systematics, it
articulates the marxian ontology of the individual and the theory
of capitalism. nietzsche and deleuze propose an idea of thought
as a sym ptom of fo rces, estab lishing its cause in a differential
play of multiple forces rather than in a real-of-the-last-instance.
whether idealist or materialist, philosophy knows
"thought" [lapensee] , a generality which is continuously
differentiated on the basis of an empirical tracing of the fac­
ulties (intuition, understanding, reason and ultimately phi­
losophy itself as objective auto-reflection). in its concepts
of thought, philosophy remains content with idealizing,
sublimating or critiquing an image of thought. in its most
ethereal forms, it conforms to its origins and internalizes an
ultimate intuitive content-topological in the best case­
that reifies or thingifies it into an ontic element or at best
into a transcendental imagination. philosophy is nothing but
the mobilization of this inertia or this substantialization that
continues to burden its experience of thought and at best
extends to the " act" (fichte, nietzsche, husserl) or to the
unthought (heidegger), but never to the real which deter­
mines thought in-the-last-instance as force (of) thought.
in opposition to the gregarious generality of "thought,"
non-philosophy discovers the content of the latter to be
foreclosed by philosophical authority. force (of) thought
is the first possible experience of thought-after vision­
in-one, which is not itself a thought-and is a defetishiz­
ing experience. whereas "thought" is a fetishized and auto­
factualized generality susceptible to circulating amongst all
philosophies and all their objects and dimensions-in the
manner of an abstract exchange or a common sense-force
(of) thought is the reality of thought insofar as the former
is not alienated in the latter or in its historico-philosophical
forms. under the dependence of vision-in-one in-the-last­
instance-albeit only through practice-it transforms the
material of philosophical statements and particularly the
datum of the images of thought so as to give them the scien­
tifico-transcendental ("unified") sense of non-philosophical
knowledges.
force (of) thought is a complex concept. the one cannot
act of itself, for only being or transcendence can act upon
philosophical material, i.e. a universal exteriority that func­tions as an organon for the one. since force (of) thought
serves to determine being itself on the basis of experience,
there is a circle, but this circle must be understood as that
which is characteristic of the a priori and which is broken
with the transcendental. in effect, being is the a priori which
structures every theory produced by thought and which as
such is itself presupposed in its existence, but the transcen­
dental identity that precedes it and makes a transcendental
subject of the force (of) thought radically halts this circu­larity because it is a clone entirely produced "under" one
or " according to" the one. the force (of) thought contains
two constituting factors: transcendental identity and aprior­
istic identity, the latter being directly open to experience.
why "force?" nothing here is either mechanical or energet­
ic: it is called "force" because transcendental identity, cloned
according to the one, concretely effectuates-due to the
occasion of philosophy and its transcendental identity­
the immanent uni-versality of vision-in-one. because it is
turned-toward . . . the world or given to . . . what it gives,
vision-in-one is a force, but still "negative" or uneffectuated.
transcendental identity is necessary in order to effectuate
this real or immanent uni-versality and to make it the tran­
scendental force that thought is.

#formal ontology
equivalent of transcendental logic (in its "analytic " a:,pect)
generalized under uni-versa! conditions of vision-in-one. it
contains the a priori non-autopositional moments that concern
position as dimension ofphilosophical decision. counterpart of
material ontology as generalized transcendental aesthetic, also
under the same uni-versa! conditions but which would instead
correspond to givenness.

a formal ontology does not exist as such in philosophy, but it
does find its restrained forms there, for example in kant's "tran­
scendental analytic" (ontology or "transcendental philosophy"
"considers the understanding and reason itself in the system of
all the concepts and principles that are related to objects in gen­
eral without admitting the objects that would be given"); and in
husserl's "formal ontology" (the aprioristic doctrine of the object
but in the modes of someth ing in general).
non-philosophy contains a "material ontology" or a "gen­
eralized transcendental aesthetic" -universalized in-the­
last-instance-which is a theory of "something in general"
insofar as it is given. it results from the labor of the force (of)
thought upon the aspects of givenness, which are those of
philosophical decision and in particular of this givenness
par excellence which is that of the regional. it also contains
its counterpart from the perspective of the position that be­
longs to decision. the non-autopositional a prioris of tran­
scendence, position and unity correspond to the a prioris
of position. why formal?
a) these a prioris are all generalized and simplified in
a non-autopositional mode in the sense that each of them,
as cloned identity, in-the-last-instance escapes from or leaps
beyond the contrasted couple that it forms with another or
with itself in its being-split: they are all equally said of phi­
losophy in accordance with the one-real.
b) in particular, transcendental logic is generalized be­
cause it leaps beyond the disjunction of forms as intellec­
tual or sensible: it also contains the clones of the sensible
or intuitive forms ("transcendence" and "position" insofar as
they are simultaneously intellectual and intuitive, ideal and
sensible, i.e. topological), provided that they form, posit or ob­
jectify something in general. the givenness/position couple
(the guiding thread in the study of a prioris) must be distin­
guished from the intellectual/sensible couple (which in any
case remains internal to philosophy since its boundaries are
indeterminate and porous).the terms "formal" and "material"
signify the overcoming of the formal/material philosophical
couple and its internal folding, the kantian manifolding of in­
tellectual form and sensible intuitive form. these couples are
restrained, even when they are no longer understood "meta­
physically" but "transcendentally" (neo-kantianism) and when
form conditions matter a priori. still conceived as empirico­
transcendental doublet or circle, this transcendental sense
does not manage to generalize form (the formal) or matter
(the material), i.e. to break the circle of their correlation or
reciprocal determination and to posit the relatively autono­
mous orders (regarding force (of) thought) of a generalized
transcendental logic and aesthetic.this generalization is only
acquired when the "transcendental subject" and its circle are
replaced by force (of) thought, which alone is uni-versa! and
which alone can determine the a prioris of form and matter,
of position and givenness, in their universal and equal validity
for philosophical material.
two complementary points follow from this:
1 . being given the uni-versa! generality of non-philosophy,
it is less a question in this universal transcendental logic of
"categories" than of transcendentals (the other*, being, unity,
the multiple, etc . and the one, insofar as they are objects of
a theory); consequently, it is a question of transcendentals in
their non-autopositional usage.
2 . when non-philosophy transmutes theories of some­
thing in general (object in general + given or matter in
general) into the theory of some object x (event, subject,
multiple, affect or something even more concrete), it must
establish what will be called the transcendental equation of
this object x, i.e. it must first define the type, order, nature
and syntax of the non-autopositional transcendentals that
somehow establish this object's own formula or "algorithm."
the syntax of this system of transcendentals is always a
mode of determination-in-the-last-instance or envelops it.

#generalization
said of the regulated reworking of a structure ofphilosophical
or scientific representation and responsible for adjusting it in­
the-last-instance to the immanent real. generalization is the
fundamental operation of non-philosophical knowledge, that
which provides it with its explanatory and deconstructive force
but on condition of being aligned with the uni-versality of vi­
sion-in-one.

philosophy generalizes: autoposition, autoreflection and primar­
i ly any type of metaphysical abstraction, etc. logos, kosmos and
polis are structural invariants or greco-occidental foundations,
which are known as ground, horizon . . . accord ing to the age.
philosophical labor has an essence that entails the reflexive for­
mation of a logos of these stabi lized invariants: this reflection
is either pure logology (aristotle's organon) or cosmic logos
or political logos. phi losophical general ization is an amplification
of reflexive interactions, an operation with a traditionally uni­tary and systematic goal; hence the multiplication of tautological
effects and reflexive symmetries. after the intervention of hume
and kant critiquing the possibil ity of metaphysical reflection,
two simulacra of general ization are set in place: i ) hegel has
conserved the effect of symmetry (of bilateral ity) . phi losophy is
then the extrapolation of logology. i nvariant foundations are as­
similated by totalizing variation as concept. hegel simultaneously
ideal izes and naturalizes thought by evacuating real immanence.
2) in the 20th century, the inverse operation was attempted: in­
terpolate or disintegrate. the other* takes precedence over be­
ing and provokes effects of asymmetry, differe(a) nce, singularity.
after husserl and nietzsche, these effects are sti l l generated in
a foundation of logos which they affect with unilaterality (the
differentialists and m ichel henry in a completely different mode) .
d u e to its metaphysical kernel, philosophy in a general way i s gen­
erality and totality, and thus its universal ity is divided and does not
manage to be constituted into real ly un iversal thought. despite
or because of its claims, philosophy remains a particular thought
(for example, "greek" thought, to which "jewish" thought can be
opposed) .
non-philosophical generalization proceeds-this is the
meaning of the "non-euclidean" metaphor-from a non- that
is an effect of vision-in-one or of the real. this is not an
immediate negation but a unilateralizing suspension of the
claims of philosophy about the real. it does not destroy the
reality of philosophical mixtures by dissociating its sides
from one another (m. henry) but conserves this reality as
support for sense, the sense (of) identity that can be said
of philosophy. vision-in-one does not deny the world but
simply unilateralizes its claims. on the basis of the experi­
ence of the world or philosophy, it gives or clones through
its own mode in-the-last-instance: on the one hand the iden­
tities that constitute the subject as force (of) thought, and
on the other the correlative identities that concern these
objects, their sense (of) identity such as it is lived by force
(of) thought. but this play of "unilateralization" and "uni­
identification," which extracts identities-in-the-last-instance
from philosophy, is a radical universalization. more precisely,
a uni-versalization: everything that is (received-) given-in­
one is done so in the mode of the immanent uni-versali­
ty of the one or is given-in-the-last-instance as an identity
turned-toward . . x (insofar as x exists). we thus oppose to
universality through and in the transcendence of philoso­
phy-which is always divided into generality and totality­
the identity of immanent uni-versality, which, on the basis
of philosophy' s terms allows for the constitution of a tran­
scendental axiomatics of first terms that are uni-versal in­
the-last-instance .
a true generalization accepts the loss o f foundations,
which are always illusory, as well as the loss of logological
manipulation on behalf of the ongoing labor of reworking.
the destabilization of greco-occidental invariants loses the
intuitive references found in a thought annexed to space and
time. thought that arises-but only in-the-last-instance­
from immanence is atopic. philosophical reflection with its
reflexive bilateral returns then appears as the symptom of
a unilateral dispatch. the positive destabilization of thought
is deployed without the flattening of philosophical symme­
tries. for example, "generalized fractality" could be known
as the uni-versal alterity (in-one) that affects thought and
suspends representational enclosures. real-fractal objectiv­
ity rectifies and generalizes knowledges by continually ad­
justing their enclosures onto the uni-versal other* and its
non-representational identity. reworking that uni-versalizes
must be distinguished from an artificializing philosophy that
naturalizes thought. it is a question of simulating-without
returning to a philosophy of simulacra-philosophical state­
ments through the non-philosophical means of a generaliz­
ing fractality; it is also a question of producing "statements
of synthesis" that are irreducible to reflexive syntheses and
thus capable of explaining them.

#fractality
one of the other possible names for the unilateral structure of
non-ph ilosophical representations. it attests to the practice of
theoretical and experimental generalization-a radical uni­
versalization-of a particular physico-geometrical theory: the
fractals of mandelbrot, from which it unleashes a fractal iden­
tity that is able to be said ofphilosophy and then constitute an
"artificial philosophy. "

the philosophico-spontaneous treatment of the mandelbrotian
concept of fractals-which is the quantification of the degree of
irregularity and fragmentation of a physico-geometrical object­
is indicative of a decisional gesture of philosophy concerning the
sciences. the mechanism of philosophical universalization, which
is illegitimate or "del irious" (cf kant) but inevitable, of a local
scientific theory is the following: knowledges are isolated from
thei r practico-experimental processes and autoposited as tran­
scendent "facts," but only insofar as they teleologically serve the
representation of being. indispensable for the survival of philoso­
phy, the result of this universalization is a m ixed empirico-tran­scendental concept of fractality. scientific modeling (dimension
d) is either conflated with the real or being: it is the real itself
that "fractures itself" (serres) . or it is re-appropriated "schizo­
analytically" to become a unitari ly cloven representation of being:
the "fractal" model describes the "smooth space" of non-metric
nomadic multiplicities (deleuze). at best, for whichever ways of
saying the thought of being or the being of thought, it is a ques­
tion, under pretext of the "reconciliation of science and philoso­
phy." of the claim to the "transcendental" right of philosophy over
the sciences.
generalized or uni-versalized fractality is a specific experi­
mentation that abandons philosophy's desire to be science
to its destiny. instead of being a simple analogical transfer­
ence of scientific knowledge on behalf of the representa­
tion of being, the experimental non-philosophical labor of
scientific concepts 1) lets a particular scientific theory be
in its own legitimacy without intervening in it, as philoso­
phy wants to, and 2) does not imprudently "apply" or gen­
eralize this particular theory for the benefit of philosophi­
cal authority. the uni-versalization of fractality is instead a
modeling, similar to mandelbrot's theoretico-experimental
work but under other conditions of experimentation-the
uni-versal of vision-in-one-and with an object that is con­
sequently "broader" than the geometrico-physical, i.e. the
philosophical object itself.
these conditions are those of first science rather than of
philosophy: 1) the one or the condition of identity-of-the­
last-instance replaces the principle of internal self-similarity
or constancy in mandelbrot; 2) the unilateral as structure of
all thought according to-the-one replaces the condition of
irregularity or fragmentation; 3) the object of fractalization,
maintaining natural language in its various philosophical,
poetic, literary uses . . . replaces the geometrico-physical ob­
ject. given these conditions, the fractalization of philosophy
is possible as a potential example of non-philosophical la­
bor capable of being effectuated under the condition of the
last-instance of the one and of force (of) thought. this la­
bor produces open ensembles, a uni-verse of truly universal
fractal knowledges that adequately "reflect" the one. such a
practice is distinguished from the task of the philosopher­
sage who, believing to hold the authority of transcendental
approval, repeats the mixed epistem o-philosophical gesture
of expropriation and reappropriation instead of using the
sciences themselves solely under the conditions of a tran­
scendental axiomatics.

#given-without-givenness
other* first name for the one or the real considered from the
philosophical and phenomenological angle of givenness. tbe
given in this radical sense is immanence (to) self and does not
need to become the object of a discipline. "given-without-given­
ness " itselfsignifies foreclosure to any operation ofgivenness (of
manifestation, etc.) or of thought and not simply to any giving
instance. therefore, the first operation of thought-according-to­
the-given will be called givenness. it is givenness-of-the-given,
but is itself determined-in-the-last-instance by the given .

the given-givenness couple or fold has a phenomenological ori­
gin and undergoes several variations that mark the post-h usser­
l ian history of phenomenology. accord ing to husserl, the "origi­
nally giving intuition" of things "in flesh and blood" or as object
is the evidence or "principle of principles." heidegger: the de­
construction of this givenness, which is stil l metaphysical, through
the givenness of being itself, through the there is (es gibt dos
sein) . derrida: "giving time," a formula that translates and de­
constructs "being and time."the history of this notion continues
q.l. marion), but in each case and in whichever gap that is em­
placed to differ or defer the coupling or to privi lege one of the
terms, it is characteristic of philosophy to no longer separate the
given and givenness in a unilaterality. these notions together serve
to think the real's manifestation in the state of phenomenon
(being or being, namely the gift itself) and its constitution as the
most primordially possible to which thought must aspire.
non-philosophy problematizes thought according to the
one or the real but does not problematize the real itself.
it dissolves the amphibology or the "fold" of the given and
givenness and treats it as a simple material to be dualyzed
in order to serve as occasion (nomination and indication)
for saying the real.this is the non-phenomenology of given­
ness.
the one-real and it alone will be called given. it can
only be given without the excess or hinter-world of an act
of givenness, and certainly not that of a giving instance on
which it would depend; it is the phenomenon itself. the
given implies in its essence that it be radically immanent
(to) self and immanent to nothing else (being, the world,
being, substance, givenness, calling, etc.). unconstituted
and "separated," the real is from the start only given (to)
itself; this is vision-in-one without the supplementary aid
of an operation of thought. as for it, givenness is first but
would be impossible if the real were not already given; it
would stop being the stability, exteriority and objectivity of
thought itself if the given did not "precede" it radically or
without return due to its primacy without priority or its
status as "last-instance."
the sphere of "reality," which is non-real or real-in-the­
last-instance and comes after the given, will globally be
called givenness, and therefore thought's transcendental es­
sence which finds its cause in the one-given. it is in turn a
phenomenal given and is also called "given" but only in-the­
last-instance. insofar as it is distinguished from the one and
unlike the latter, it supposes an operation of givenness that
sets philosophy in play, the givenness of philosophy.
non-philosophy thus manifests the essence of thought,
but not the one which, already being manifested by itself,
does not need to be manifested again; but the one can also
be manifested under conditions of objectivity that must be
satisfied in its own way.

#god-without-being
first name for the identity (of) "god, " human identity in-the
last-instance of a simple onto-theo-logical material. necessary
symbolfor a non-theology or a unified theory ofphilosophy and
of religious faith.

the expression "god without bei ng" comes from jean-luc mari­on and testifies to a deconstruction which is at the least heideg­
gerian and moreover to that of onto-theo-logy.this is because in
phi losophy the idea of god represents a particular onto-theo­
logical mode of the matrix of the coupling of the great contraries
(being/being, one/m ultiple) that are characteristic of the meta­
physical decision and related to the causal ity of the one. instead
of one of the contraries simply being spl it-with the assistance
of language-in order to reach the status of a principle (for ex­
ample and notably the platonic one) , each of the opposed are
here subjected to this spl itti ng: the one of the aforementioned
example would appear as one-for-the-dyad, the two of the dyad
itself appears as "one divided in two" and god as the concep­
tual gathering of this double division-the whole of things which
kant said is composed by the unity of the one and the m u ltiple.
in other words, god is the principle of the closure of onto-theo­
logical, i.e. philosophical language.
in the ontological proof, god is the name of the coupling of
essence and existence, or that of being and being, since god is
the being-who-is. in the cosmological proof, god appears con­
versely as the difference between being and bei ng: throughout
the play of the two proofs, god is then the difference of the
identity and d ifference of being and being, i.e. pure amphibology.
the contemporary attempts (levinas, marion) to think god
without being, without essence or existence, leads to the identifi­
cation of god with the other*; an other* that is non-thetic in and
by the definitions of an ethical god for levinas and that of a god
without theology-freed from amphibology-in marion. but the
amphibology reappears as the crossing of philosophical decision
insofar as it is structured as a metaphysics which these attempts
cannot radical ly inval idate.
not being self, the one-in-one would not be able to be god
(as in schelling who confuses the one and being). not be­
ing non-self, the stranger-subject would not be able to be
(in particular) god. god is a specific and irreducible mode of
the stranger-this is at least what the onto-theo-logical ma­terial imposes. vision-in-one determines in-the-last-instance
the experience of the identity (oo god, identity (oo a tran­scendence or of an absolute height (and not simply of an ex­
teriority).this is the only way to restore to god his transcen­
dence as it is lived-in-one, or his sense (oo identity, whereas
it is compromised by all the modes of arguing for god' s
subject through presence or, the other way around, through
withdrawal, or ultimately through withdrawal into presence
which would qualify god as "gift." it is important to dual­
yze the one-god confusion, to recognize in the identity (oo
god-always presupposed by theology-an effect of vision
in-one. if the "given" precedes givenness and thus necessar­
ily precedes the gift, the only error of dialectics is to have at­
tributed this being-given ("givenhood" [donneite1) to being
by coining the expression of"being-given" (kojeve), and also
by consequently not allowing god to appear in the non-real
order of givenness. being given the one as well the given­
hood of the other*-as-givenness in-the-last-instance, the new
deal of non-philosophy will consist in admitting in its own
way the being-given-without-givenness of the givenness of a
non-theological-god, of a god that is atheistic or human in­
the-last-instance, all the more transcendent, whose paradox
dissolves the amphibology without resurrecting the dialec­
tic of god and man (hegel, feuerbach). it is only from the
radical phenomenal (and not phenomenological) point of
view of the-last-instance that one knows that god is non­
sufficient, i.e. that man is the measure of god himself.

#hypothesis
"applied " or variant usage of non-philosophy (proposed by a .f
schmid) that adds to its axioms a supplementary axiom con­
cerning philosophical decision: that of the de jure multiplicity
ofphilosophical decisions. this axiom is simultaneously added
to those of vision-in-one and those thatformalize philosophical
decision.

this problem makes no sense in philosophy and must not
be conflated with the philosophical problem of the one and
the multiple. at most, a philosopher-historian of philosophy
(m. gueroult) has elaborated a theory of philosophical decision
in a fichtean vein under the hypothesis of an empirical or de facto
spatio-temporal multipl icity of philosophies.
sufficiency requires the certitude and absoluteness that
culminate in the principles of philosophy. on the contrary,
non-philosophy can support and promote a practice of phi­
losophy-and not a "pure" non-philosophy-by hypothesis,
rather than speculatively, without sufficiency or exclusivity.
hypothesis is a completely fundamental concept of non­
philosophy, but it is even more so for this " application" to
which it gives rise. it allows for the admission of the coex­
istence of multiple positions, contrary to the point of view
of sufficiency, yet no longer conceives them as contraries or
even "positions" but as transcendental orders or transcen­
dental identities. veritable differences of order are no lon­
ger determined by the war of philosophical interests but
arise from multiple transcendental identities that are each
hypotheses. the encounters of philosophies, concepts and
names of philosophers are no longer the occasion for a hier­
archization, since hypothesis in-the-last-instance is the form
of equivalence of the encounters. in the same way that it
can be supposed that simulation has modified relations be­
tween theory and experience in the contemporary scienc­
es, it can be supposed that hypothesis conceived in this way
will both transform the relations in philosophy that govern
the transcendental and the empirical and will displace one
of the major problems of philosophical objectivity: respect
for the sciences and facts must be accommodated by philos­
ophers in their personal philosophical history, which leads
them to perpetuate a vicious dialectic between model and
pupil, teacher and disciple, against other positions supposed
inauthentic. "philosophizing by hypothesis" is a way to give
a meaning to a love-without-teacher-and-without-disciple in
philosophy and turns the latter into a veritable dwelling for
the stranger. philosophical individuation is then considered
as " ordinary" and no longer as the effect of a narcissistic dif­
ference.

if non-philosophy fully and rigorously takes philosophy
as reduced occasion and as "object," nothing prevents sup­
posing that this object possesses the degree and nature of
autonomy that this new axiom grants it. in this case, non­
philosophy modifies the practice of philosophy itself. this
is a postulate for non-philosophy in the sense that no rule
can allow us to foresee the concrete nature of such effects.
it is not simply a question of relating the material's content
to the one according to rules that deliver philosophy from
its sufficiency, but a question of practicing philosophy, psy­
choanalysis, ethics, etc. in such a way that they satisfy the re­
quirements of non-philosophy under this axiom. this sche­
matism of non-philosophy in this material helps to transform
the practice of philosophy in several ways. from the point
of view of "pure reason," philosophy would proceed by hy­
potheses and first terms; there would be as many philoso­
phies as scenarios of mixtures between the empirical and
the transcendental. from the aesthetic point of view, every
philosophical project would have its own style that could
individuate it: this is one of the senses that could be given to
"artificial philosophy." from the ethical point of view, radical
evil-which concerns the world-would be judged as the
decoy that philosophy's distance from the real produces
out of radical misfortune, the essence of human solitudes.
each concept elaborated by non-philosophy could be rein­
troduced into its discourse of origin and enrich it without
thereby reproducing a logic of sufficiency. this schematism
would be a positive and liberating transformation of the ma­
terial in itself.
such a schematism confirms that non-philosophy is not
at all the end of philosophy but its safeguarding in multiple
and non-exclusive practices. philosophy continues as one
of the forms of non-philosophy. this axiom in question is
thus the condition of reality of philosophy in non-philoso­
phy. it saves philosophy from non-philosophy's edge, which
it softens, but without returning to the forms of its most
spontaneous sufficiency.

#lived experience
every act of thought or of experience, of theory or of life, insofar
as it is related in-the-last-instance to the one as lived experience
(of the) lived or is immanent "in-lived experience " and insofar
as it defines the cause of a non-phenomenology in this way.

after descartes, transcendental phenomenology fulfills the te/os
of "lived experience" (erlebnis) that spanned certain idealist phi­
losophies of l ife (plotinus, fichte, hegel). "lived experience" then
designates any intentional act as related to consciousness on its
subjective side (hyle and noesis). lived experience is thus con­
scious by definition and "ready for perception" (husserl); abso­
lutely and adequately immanent or given without attempts, unlike
the object; ind ividualized and susceptible to plurality; u ltimately
pure insofar as it is transcendental and not psychological. even
in transcendental phenomenology, it neither attains the purity of
radical immanence nor the ultimate and irreversible character
which are the mark of the real. it is always somewhat of the
transcendental order of an object or attribute that binds-if not
violates-the (rational) subject. although remain i ng withi n phi­
losophy's l i m its, a radical ization of phenomenological l ived expe­
rience is given by immanent "life" which is auto-generative and
auto-affective in m ichel henry's sense.
non-philosophy universalizes what philosophy gives it the
occasion to think as "lived experience." the unilateralizing
suspension and uni-identification of the transcendence of
phenomenological lived experience makes the sense of
the latter still appear as being a foreclosure of non-phe­
nomenological or radically immanent lived experience.
this sense is in some way the non-phenomenological no­
ema of the "lived" phenomenological object. in this form it
can then serve as first term that names the one itself or
the real of-the-last-instance, the "thing" of real lived experi­
ence. delivered from its autoposition and its perceptibility
of consciousness, reduced to its identity-in-one, it ultimately
possesses a transcendental purity and a universality that al­low it to be said of any thought or experience whatsoever
insofar as it is related to this lived-experience-of-the-last-in­
stance. as always in non-philosophy but here more particu­
larly, in effect (lived experience as) the real or one-in-one is
distinguished from the " lived" as a symbol of conceptual ori­
gin that has undergone a non-conceptual treatment of first
term, a symbol through which the real forms the object of
a position of thought obviously without being posited in its
essence itself. the term "lived experience" is thus also one
name among others without a phenomenological type of
privilege and without giving rise to a philosophy of life.
within the framework of a non-phenomenology, it can be
re-worked as "lived-without-life," a first term that indicates
its neutralization as a philosophical concept.

#human
in their complete notion, men or humans are existing-stranger­
subjects determined-in-the-last-instance by the real or the one
as ego-in-ego. contra ry to the philosophical ego, man-ego is
foreclosed to subjects, but the latter, insofar as they presuppose
the former, effectuate man-ego 's uni-versality for the world.

as a philosophical concept, man is a humanoid traced from the
dyad of the anthropoid, wh ich has hardly gone beyond greek
anthropological thought. and of the judea-christian "creature."
philosophy has aligned this concept with the cosmos, physis, be­
ing, spirit, wil l to power; etc. each as abstract and puppet enti­
ties that imply the dismemberment of man into the attributes
(power; language, sex, society, politics, etc.) with which it has at­
tempted to artificially recompose him. the pro-thetic, anti-thetic,
syn-thetic-artificial-man of philosophy (and not simply that
of anthropology or the human sciences to which worl*d-thought
assigns its dirty work) is this "sublime abortion" that ought to give
birth to the "overman.' ' philosophy wants the inhuman, the pre­
human, the all-too-human and the over-human without recogniz­
ing the "ordinary" noth ing-but-human.the phi losophical heavens
are teeming with anthropoid and artificial creatures-dasein in­
cluded-spawned from a cloven thought and lead ing a host of
masks and travesties which, after that of the demons and angels,
is hard ly more rational ized. humanism is an inferior angelism and
a lie about man. philosophy is not so easi ly saved from this dis­
honor by the thesis of a theoretical anti-humanism (althusser)
that will not have been sufficiently radical ized.

non-philosophy is like a negative universal thought that can
be effectuated, for example, in the language of a science-of­
men rather than that of the sciences-of-man. determined-in­
the-last-instance according to the radically non-anthropoid
ego-in-ego, it manifests the essence of the existing-stranger­
subject and more importantly that of force (of) thought. but
the latter is a general and even universal matrix and must
be modulated by the a prioris of a unified theory of phi­
losophy and sociology, psychology, psychoanalysis, ethnol­ogy, etc. it is a question of establishing in the disciplines
of the human sciences a thought whose standing-as-human
and standing-as-science are assured without requiring the
exclusion of philosophy pure and simple. the civil war be­
tween philosophy and the human sciences can only find
its peace treaty outside itself and in a different conception
of man. non-philosophy is a rigorous heresy: it makes of
man a being-unseparated (from) self, and thus separated­
without-separation from the world. in other words, for one
of the first times it has become possible to define man in a
"formal" way but without formalism; to constitute man as
an object of axiomatic decisions rather than philosophical
decisions. man is precisely the real foreclosed to philoso­
phy. philosophy can only imagine what this lone "being" or
"non-being" is who can be put into axioms and that-so
great is its autonomy- only tolerates axioms. where there
is man, the thesis and principle are ruled out. where there
is the human, thought must be made axiom and renounce
its sufficiency.

#material ontology
that which philosophy becomes or thefunction itfulfills in rela­
tion with experience when its sufficiency is suspended by force
(ofj thought and when it is reduced to its sense (ofj identity.
it is then the material a priori through which all phenomena
are necessarily given; equivalent to the term chora in its non­
philosoph ical usage.

philosophy claims through its form to give regional or singular
phenomena and submit them to its legislation. consequently, it
posits-according to widely diverse modes which are internal
to itself and to its relation to experience-some universal and
necessary structures of the " a priori" type, i.e. traced in general
from the sciences. it therefore supposes: i ) a certain contingen­
cy or autonomy, even alterity, of experience in relation to these
a prioris; 2) a certain superiority of phi losophy itself over expe­
rience through the means of the a priori itself-to which it is
however not reduced-of which it is the superior form stil l called
"transcendental": the principle of reason, for example, must be
"grounded" in turn or "ungrounded" accordingly. phi losophy is
always presented as both the ultimate legislator of experience
as wel l as its a priori organon. overall, philosophy wil ls or desires
its un ity with experience, but this un ity remains contingent, men­
aced, aleatory: to re-assure it is the motor for the creation of new
philosophies, which are supposed to have more mastery over the
real than their forerunners.
the suspension of the principle of sufficient philosophy
(psp) in its different steps (real, transcendental, a priori) un­
leashes the identity (of) philosophy and generally transforms
it into a noematic a priori of the world or of all possible ex­
perience, yet an a priori that is itself of the non-philosoph­
ical type. the thesis "all of experience is philosophizable"
never stops being a new philosophical and also antinomic
decision through which philosophy is necessarily and uni­
versally valid for all phenomena without exception, unless
the various dimensions of philosophy's mixture-insofar as
it is givenness-and of givenness with experience are lived
in their sense (of) identity by force (of) thought. philosophy
stops being legislator of the event in order to become its a
priori giver: mixture itself is given as identity.
the contingent relations between experience and phi­
losophy are then intrinsically indissoluble or are thought
outside of any hierarchy. hence an equivalence (without
exchange or reciprocity) of (non-mixed) identities that in­
troduces democracy into the heart of the given or of new
experience. any antic term of object or action or any on­
tological term and any term of philosophy, any statement,
etc . is henceforth treated as such an identity in which, from
the same gesture, experience is immediately inscribed
philosophically and philosophy immediately incarnated
ontically. this radical manifold of "materiale" [materiale]
identities forms a chora to which philosophy and its neces­
sary relation to experience are reduced. philosophy is re­
duced to the state of simple "material" a priori-or "mate­
riale" rather-and thus itself becomes in this form the basic
material of non-philosophy. this is the "uniformal" form of
materiale givenness of the phenomena. it fulfills a function,
but merely a function of simple a priori organon of expe­
rience. it corresponds with a "transcendental aesthetic" of
the world or with any possible experience whatsoever on
the basis of transcendence. "aesthetic," but one that substi­
tutes philosophy itself (its identity)-and thus its relation to
any experience whatsoever-for the regional and limited
models of givenness-whether they be scientific, percep­
tual, artistic, etc . -i.e. the models philosophy would latch
onto so as to be assured of givenness and mastery over phe­
nomena. "transcendental," but simply due to the origin of
this reduction in force (of) thought. since its principle is
the identity-but exerted in its real origin, not posited dog­
matically-of being and being, it therefore generalizes the
fundamental axiom of a recent materialist ontology-math­
ematics = ontology (badiou)-by extending this identity
beyond mathematics to all possible experience and by tran­
scendentally determining this equation instead of leaving it
to a dogmatic thesis that lacks any legitimacy besides being
one decision among others. philosophy as simple materiale
ontology is a way of short-circuiting materialism as a dis­
simulated philosophical decision. furthermore, by limiting
philosophy to a simple aprioristic ontology of experience,
non-philosophy legitimizes or validates it-within certain
limits that precisely result in the elimination of the violent
and arbitrary act of auto-legitimation (including its kantian
auto-limitation or its deconstructive hetero-limitation) but
which better assure it a necessary and positive function.

#metascience
ensemble of discourses of the ph ilosophical type that originally
have science as their object, the elucidation and foundation of
its essence, but which in turn are treated as the object or phe­nomena of first science.

th is concept does not have a special usage in philosophy, since
the latter spontaneously recognizes the right to legislate for sci­ence and because it is therefore by definition "meta-science,"
sometimes absolute science or science of the sciences, some­
times the discourse of elucidation, commentary, i nterpretation,
critique and foundation of the sciences.
non-philosophy defines a precise content and status of
metascience. a content: the set of non scientific discourses
that aim at the essence of science; either directly, epistemol­
ogies, philosophies-of-sciences and philosophies-to-science
(which are based explicitly on a given empirical theory);
or indirectly, philosophy in general as it is implicitly deter­
mined by scientific ruptures. a status: "metascience" joins
with "science," and this generalized couple is that of "math­
ematics" and "metamathematics" posited by hilbert in his
theory of the demonstration of the absolute consistency of
formal systems. this concept thus has meaning only within
and according to science and its priority over metascience .
this generalization answers a precise objective:
1 . to show the similarity between the programs of for­
malist (hilbert) and logicist (frege, russell) foundation of
arithmetic and the programs for the foundation of science
in general, which all philosophies are implicitly and all "the­
ories of science" explicitly (aristotle; fichte; philosophy as
" science of science in general" ; husserl: philosophy as rigor­
ous science or "science with absolute foundation," etc.).
2 . to make metascientific discourses a type of operation
similar to what godel did to metamathematics: instead of
supposing, without evidence other than philosophical faith,
that philosophies are really able to found and anticipate the
sciences and that this objective has any sort of meaning, to
invert the situation and to be given the means of a science
of metascience or of philosophy. this is "first science," also
known as "non-philosophy" (or "science of philosophy," but
this is only one aspect of its activity). philosophy in effect
corresponds with the region of phenomena that this new or
"unified" science uses to determine not the traditional " es­
sence of science" but the knowledge of essence (of) science.
3. to demonstrate through this new discipline qua "uni­fied theory" that if metascience aims at the essence of
science, it aims at it in illusion or repression-namely in
foreclosure-and that it is due to these two reasons that
philosophy functions as material.
the concept "metascience" makes it possible to renew
the parallel problem of "metalanguage" and to sketch out a
possible treatment of this question. first science posits the
following statements that are also valid for metalanguage:
1) there is, in any event, metascience, which is to say a dis­
course that is posited or presented as such (respective to
metalanguage); 2) the statements: " there is no metascience
( . . . );' or; "there is metascience, and it is valid," are excluded
as an expression of philosophy's sufficiency; in the same
way, though to a lesser degree: "there are effects of metasci­
ence ( . . . )," effects of a play of "textual forces" or a "language
game" in the immanence into which metascience plunges.
first science is a transcendenta*l science of metascience and
reintroduces it into the one-real's immanence-of-the-last­
instance; it is not a philosophy, which would reintroduce it
into the immanence of a (philosophical) decision.

#mixture
other* first name for philosophical decision insofar as it is
founded on reversibility as structure or limit-tendency of the
blending, fold, relation, correlation, synthesis, convertibility,
etc.-that are specifically characteristic of unitary philosophi­
cal syntaxes.

such as philosophy itself thematizes it (deleuze, derrida) , the
mixture is not simply the form of its material or of its object
(anaxagoras) , but its own autoposition, its point of view (plato,
phi/ebus) and thus philosophy's system-essence and sufficiency.
from this perspective, the mixture can grow and transform along
its external edges through which it is affected (derrida) or along
its internal edges and its m id-place or mi-l ieu (deleuze) . but in
all these scenarios, mixture thinks and deconstructs itself and ex­
ceeds the simple blending, the synthesis, etc. the "transcenden­
tal-empirical doublet" (foucault) is only one particu lar mode of
the mixture-form, whose more universal forms are autoposition,
autogivenness, autoreflection, etc. mixture in this "total" or "ab­
solute" sense is not always real ized since philosophy is bogged
down in various objects, foreign objectives and materials, regional
representations. but mixture is philosophy's tendential or limit ­
form. and phi losophy does nothing but thematize mixture by
itself.
non-philosophy resumes this theme of mixture by general­
izing it-in approximation with an interpretation-to al l philoso­
phy, and then by demonstrating mixture's identity (of) mixture for
the subject. i n effect, all phi losophical decisions necessari ly obey
one structural and transcendental rule: the unity of contraries.
from the start, contraries are posited as more or less antagonis­
tic or even reciprocal in a dyad; then one of the contraries has
the privilege of supporting the th ird with which it identifies and
which unifies the other two in a synthesis. for example, phi­
losophy thinks the one and the multiple as opposites but as ca­
pable of being united in the synthesis of"multipl icities" (deleuze)
and in general in one/multiple hierarchies. the term produced
in this way is a m ixture.
non-philosophy transforms the ancient and contemporary
indications about the mixture, as object and as philosophy's
form, into symptoms whose identity (of) mixture it extracts.
this means that mixture in the sense we have defined it is
not simply the form of philosophy but the a priori philo­
sophical form of all experience, the interior form of world­
thought, and not merely a regional or even "fundamental,"
i.e. irreducibly contingent, form.
as will to self, philosophical mixture believes to be able
to think itself because it wills to be thought in this way.
hence the philosophical faith in the real that it is (without
yet being the real), that it desires (without obtaining it), etc.
it is therefore the place par excellence of transcendental
illusion and of a "real appearance " that is even more pro­
found than transcendental dialectical appearance (kant) be­
cause it is the appearance of philosophy itself and not simply
that of metaphysics.amphibological by essence, philosophy
is structurally incapable of dualyzing contraries, which is
only possible from the immanence in-the-last-instance of
the one. philosophy is the ideological place par excellence
(marx-althusser's concept of ideology is here generalized),
the place of real illusion and then transcendental illusion (in
a non kantian sense or in a generalized kantianism). never­
theless mixture is in itself indestructible, and so non-philos­ophy, unlike a philosophy of transcendental immanence (m.
henry), cannot believe to be able to dissolve it as without
reality or consistency, but merely to suspend its relevance in
the constitution of the subject who exists-stranger or of the
force (of) thought.

#multiple
nature of the aprioristic instance, the last in the constitution of
force (of) thought, as non-autopositional distance or transcen­
dence. restored to its identity-of-the-last-instance-in-one, exte­
riority is the element of a radical multiple or multiple without
multiplicity (without unity to recover it or to "set-theorize "), a
multiple that is neither qualitative nor quantitative nor quanti­
tative-qualitative, but purely phenomenal andfirst.

philosophy knows purely qual itative concepts (bergson) or even
purely quantitative and numerical concepts (badiou); explicitly
the majority of the time, but implicitly every other time for the
m ixed-qualitative and quantitative-concepts (nietzsche, de­
leuze: d ifference of quantity as quality) . but despite their clai m
the two former conceptions are not quite pure once they are
related to the structure of the philosophical decision that their
concept of the multiple deploys. every phi losophical theory of
the m u ltiple or even of the one is structured as a metaphysical
m ixture of the one and the multiple. the m u ltiple is amphibo­
logical with the one and with, for the same reasons, the dyad of
the one/m ultiple, because the vertical axis crosses in metaphys­ics the horizontal axis of being/being.

when the one is itself recognized, without any abstrac­
tion other than the axiomatic kind, as " separated" from the
doublet-crossed structure of metaphysics-when the one
is recognized as " separated-without-separation" -it is nei­
ther qualitative (plotinus), nor quantitative (pythagoras), nor
qualitative and quantitative (plato). everything that sustains
its mark as clone is also protected from these adventures.
this is the case for the multiple, which appears at the last
level of force (of) thought, after the real one and transcen­dental identity in the form of a non-autopositional exteri­
ority, one and simple, not redoubled or folded back. the a
priori has always contained a non empirical multiple but
no longer specifically a "pure" multiple, for it is still condi­tioned by its relation to experience. the non-philosophical
concept of the a priori also harbors the first appearance
of a multiple-without-unity, precisely that of the identity (of
the) multiple.the identity (of the) multiple is the very con­
cept that makes it possible to avoid quantitative/qualitative
mixtures like the amphibology or the convertibility-in ap­
proximation with a hierarchy and its reversals-of the one
and the multiple. the multiple is not itself multiple, is not
predicated of itself. but the fact that there is no multiple
of the multiple does not mean that it forms a metaphysical
entity: the one determines-in-the-last-instance the multiple
such as it is or in its identity.

#non-aesthetics
said of the application-in several form of the non-philo­
sophical process to aesthetic matter itself either-first distinc­
tion-said of theoretical non-philosophy (first science) alone or,
in the complete rigor of non-philosophy intrinsically modified
in an aesthetic sense, with "logico-aesthetic " material. or-sec­
ond distinction-said of its application to aesthetic discourse or
directly to anistic matter itself, to "an " (under condition of the
addition of axioms relative to the autonomy of an and irreduc­
ible to those of vision-in-one).

it would be necessary to say: non-aesthetics, for the plural des­
ignates the fragmentation of the grand trad itional text of the
thought of art-and the eventual extraction of the different
possible aesthetics-produced by particular general izations
(non-bachelardian, non-kierkegaardian, non-baudelairian, etc.)
that are sti l l the philosoph ical symptoms of a universal non-aes­
thetics in the radical sense of this word. the term is not directly
present in phi losophy. it nevertheless retains a resemblance with
the philosophical concept of non-phi losophy, of which it seems to
present a sort of analogical extension in the form of a particular
application to the artistic domain. this is a new way of thinking
philosophy in resort to peripheral categories that traditionally
belong to the artistic domain. for example, this approach cor­
responds with the reflection on hypnotism in bergson ian givens.
the aesthetic i llusions concerning hypnotism tend to reinstate a
simulation of duration through fragmented tools of expression.
the "non" -philosophical is then a peripheral manner of reacti­
vating philosophy. ever si nce its margins (literary, pictorial, etc.),
this activity of philosophy is not simply contemporary (derrid­
ean or deleuzian): it corresponds with an old usage that is per­
petually reactual ized. so as to differentiate it from the rigorous or
non-philosophical usage, we shall designate it by the term "non
aesthetics" without the feature of a hyphenated union. non aes­
thetics is essentially a deferred m imesis, i.e. a cloning that is still
imaginary or intra-philosophical.
the usage of non-aesthetics should be found instead within
the specificity of the activity of the "non," indeed in a specifi­
cally artistic concept, if not of the real, at least that of"force
(of) creation." it is radically distinguished from the bache­
lardian type of generalization of a philosophy of the "non"
even if the latter is extended to domains beyond that of the
epistemological. it is universal according-to-the-one-in-the­
last-instance. nonetheless, the extension of the "philosophy
of the non" to domains beyond the epistemological, over
the terrain of a philosophy that is itself non-bachelardian,
is already a sort of basic approximation of non-philosophy,
although it would nevertheless lack this primacy of non­
philosophy's inherent identity. three guiding principles will
be extrapolated:
in the end, any artistic composition can be combined
with any composition of thought without any limit: this
is the first axiomatic constant. from this point of view, it
is necessary to rethink the currently used concept of the
"avant-garde" in a non-historical context, since all linearity
and circularity of history are excluded.
a second constant of axiomatic creativity reposes upon
the fact that combinations can be assembled-combina­
tions of particular non-aesthetics-according to a principle
of generalized relativity, forming like fractal-isles of thought
on art, fractal-isles that can border on the works themselves,
at best by constituting an equivalent poetics. different par­
ticular non-aesthetics can then spring forth, spread out and
combine to describe the most various works-be they an­
cient or traditional, recent or futuristic.this is an activity to
which no limits can be fixed. the regroupings of the fractal­
isles produced by non-aesthetics could then designate con­tinents internally homothetic with the constitutive unities.
on this terrain, one could witness increasingly dense non­
aesthetics emerge as the continental regroupings of scat­
tered isles.
but, third constant, everything must be able to be erased
and return to the non-system of-the-last-instance. this con­
stant keeps non-aesthetics from congealing into a system of
sufficiency, i.e. returning to a philosophical illusion.
non-philosophical pragmatics is at the basis of this un­
limited aesthetic production. some of these theoretical non­
aesthetic isles have appeared, like for example, the non-phil­
osophical a priori of "non-euclidean perspectives."

#non-dictionary
collection of non-autopositional universes obtained by the re­
iteration of a universal pragmatics onto a material of philo­
sophical and regional utterances; open list of non-conceptual
symbols obtained on the basis of a list ofphilosophical concepts.

this expression does not exist in philosophy but could designate
a negative or suspending moment in the economy of a dictionary.
in a dialectical or differential economy. etc.
a non-dictionary is what is inscribed through a pragmatics
on the basis of vision-in-one and its regulation of concep­
tual, philosophical and even philosophizable material (re­gional terms).against unitary philosophical autosufficiency,
it opposes the sufficiency-to-the-multiple of the real one,
rather than the multiplicity of philosophical and semantic
decisions. whereas philosophical dictionaries in the name
of unity constitute a census of the multiple opinions on the
subject of a presupposed-being or (psychoanalytic variant)
a supposed-other*, a non-philosophical dictionary, without
another supposition, translates the real multiplicity inherent
to force (ot) thought on the basis of an empirical plurality
of concepts. force (ot) thought manifests each of the cata­logued terms as non-unitary universes.

#non-epistemology
unified theory of science and philosophy which takes for its ob­
ject and material the discourse that lays claim to a particular
mixture of science and ofphilosophy: epistemology.

philosophy recognizes epistemology i n two ways that are not al­
ways exclusive. it can treat epistemology as a conti nuation of the
classical phi losophy of the sciences which has crystal lized around
the kantian question of the possibil ity of science, often relating
precise and circumscribed scientific problems both to philosophi­
cal systems, whether classical or modern (aristotle, descartes,
kant, hegel, russell, quine, etc. . . . ) and to traditional philosophi­
cal positions (real ism, empiricism, ideal ism, etc.). it can also con­
sider epistemology as a relatively autonomous discipline-simul­
taneously more regional and more technical-whose sources
or occasions are extensions beyond the euclidean mechanics or
geometry of the physical or even "exact" model of the concept
of science; or it can also consider the technological interpreta­
tions of th is latter concept. with th is more specific preference,
remaining strong for over a century, epistemology has become
extremely multiform and varied in regard to the nature and
order of magnitudes of its objects and methods. nevertheless,
its object or its ultimate interest always more or less explicitly
remains the criteria of scientificity for science or the sci­
ences. in its constantly displaced and renewed repetition, this
question is often understood as aporetic and even at times gives
rise to an admission of failure, which is the motivation for the
"external" (technological, sociological, economic, pol itical and
ethical) perspectives on science. epistemology's future under
these hypotheses seems like the becoming-network of its con­
cept of science into a complex, non-linear and unstable system.
according to non-philosophy, this "future" of epistemology
is explained by the fact that it spontaneously treats (and
only treats) local problems on the basis of the reduction of
science to isolated knowledges and theories, consequently
to the detriment of the nature of its extreme poles of consti­tution whose fundamentally resolved contributions it sup­
poses in advance and without examination. this is why as a
general rule it supposes an implicit continuity between sci­entific and philosophical concepts, the possibility of an am­
phibological recovery of the former through the latter. it si­multaneously acts as though one could produce statements
about science-which is in itself already problematic-and
as though philosophy were on the contrary a simple pas­
sage to the limit of an object defined or definable by a uni­versal correspondent, a passage that makes it impossible to
speak specifically about this envelopment that philosophy
is. instead, non-philosophy admits that science cannot be
taken as an object like epistemology has done by imposing a
philosophical objectification and reduction onto it but that
it can be described as an "invariant" of philosophy, which,
instead of reifying it into a model, enriches it, multiplies its
effects and in particular makes possible their experimenta­tion. on its own behalf non-philosophy will use the material
of epistemology; it will relate the latter's amphibologies-in
particular what functions as "continuity" and "recovery" -to
an identity that determines them in-the-last-instance but by
conserving the terms and words of epistemology which, in
a certain way, it will axiomatize according to a transcenden­
tal, but not logical, mode.this labor will make it possible not
to abandon this discipline to its mechanically foreseeable
future and to liberate it from an image-too narrow and too
historically determined, without real universality-of the
sciences and of philosophy. it will then have to shed light
on new problems that are embarrassing and poorly thought:
the obsolescence of the notion of "domain," the formation
of disciplines whose interest is no longer simply theoreti­cal, the enumeration of the conjunctions and analogies in
the formation of a scientific problem, the status of the en­
gineering sciences, the signification of ethical discourses
accompanying scientific and technological developments,
etc . . . . these problems only appear for an instant and symp­
tomatically in this framework of epistemology because the
inexplicitness of their concepts and an overly narrow, not
quite universal understanding of philosophy insist that it al­
ways work under the same hypotheses, sometimes reversed
and intensified, not recognized as such, but always left to
philosophical sufficiency. hence some of the very narrow
and consequently moral descriptions (it's necessary to "get
your hands dirty" to comprehend science, etc .).
the dualyzation of epistemology in accordance with its
two sources allows them to be unlocked as transcendental
orders, their unification without hierarchy or non unitary
unification. but as a result the object of the epistemological
discourses appear as having little to do with science, since
these discourses essentially suppose a continuity between
their object and the knowledge of this object. epistemol­
ogy effectively but confusedly makes use of philosophy on
behalf of the sciences. by transforming it into material, non­
philosophy will be able to utilize these discourses as new
sources of scientific and philosophical problems and knowl­
edges wherein philosophy and science work on an equal
footing. for example, the geometrical concept of fractality
can find a scientific usage without being geometrical for
all that; it can also be formulated in natural language, with­
out becoming a philosophical or epistemological mixture,
through a non-philosophical procedure of universalization.
hence the new non-epistemological conceptions of induc­
tion, deduction, axiomatization, hypotheses, definitions and
of other notions of classical epistemology.

#non-erotics
ensemble of the non-philosophical modes of approach to and
formulations of duality that constitute the stranger-subject as
uni-sex subject.

what wil l be called erotics is the converging set of doctrines
which, from plato to badiou passing through kierkegaard and
n ietzsche, tend to guarantee consistency to the thematic of an
originary two-an attempt more recently replaced by psycho­analysis. philosophical erotics tends to sexualize d ual ity by impos­
ing the dyad ic form of the union of contraries upon it, which is
replaced by the unity that the philosophical one imprints on it:
in effect, the sex of philosophy is nothing but a contrary-for-the­
one.
i n psychoanalysis, one cou ld say contrary-for-the-other*. which
is merely the m isrecognition of sexuation rather than of the oth­
er. what results is the assumption of a sex without sexuality and
the erotics of a relation-without-relation where, however. "the
three falls out of the two" (lacan), i.e. an external relation is
superposed onto the non-sexual relation in the other*: the con­
trary thus becomes the contrad ictory on condition that the real
of the one be conceived as the impossible. philosophical erotics
or the erotics of contraries wi l l therefore be distinguished from
a psychoanalytical erotics of contradiction that can at least bear
witness to a jubi lating consummation of the logos.
as fully enjoyed and thus without the hinter-world of jou­
issance, the one is (non-) erotic since it has nothing to do
with contraries and never participates in any logico-real
mixture. without the subject-object of aesthetics or the de­
siring ethical subject, this enjoyed separates the one from
any aim of given difference, whether in-one or outside it, an
aim still called love because in non-philosophy every differ­
ence is instead dualytic.
vision-in-one certainly does not ignore the horizon of
the two and the multiple. but instead of being selected
from the multiple in a subtractive way-in a manner in
which it would fundamentally appear sexuated under the
effect of this deduction and in which, according to ba­
diou's strong proposition, love would always be heterosex­
ual-this extreme singularity, non-femininity, which is not
produced from a cut, is to itself alone sex-without-sexuation
or sexual-without-sexuality.this is why it appears as enjoyed
and determines-in-the-last-instance " sexual difference," clon­ing on the basis of the latter a non-erotism which is not
the negation of eros but the constitution of each human
as a uni-sex subject. in this sense, every non-erotic subject
is stranger-sex or sexually-exists-stranger. uni-sex is not the
marketable indifference of the sexes but sex insofar as it
makes each subject a stranger.

#non-ethics
effectuation of non-philosophy in world-ethics or philosophical
ethics; this term does not designate the negation of ethics but its
universalization according-to-the-one as well as its exclusive
subordination to man; it is the theory and the usage of ethics
adequate to man 's essence as radical immanence or radical
misfortune.

despite certain empiricist interpretations that conflate it with the
description of customs or ethos in opposition to morality which
would be prescriptive, ethics designates either a more univer­
sal form of commandment than morality (it is addressed to all
moral beings and to the personality qua society and not to the
individual-cf. schel ling) or the universality of a science. from this
perspective, it is either a theoretical science of moral judgment or
a practical science teaching what should be wil led.
non-ethics resumes this aforementioned and double deter­
mination of ethics and transforms it. it is identically present­
ed as a theory or a science and as a pragmatics concerning
philosophical and regional (sociological, biological, etc.)
doctrines of morality or of practice-le. concerning world­
ethics.
it demonstrates that the relations of philosophy and eth­
ics as ethico-philosophical blendings are aporetic . on the
one hand, these relations subordinate ethics to philosophy
as "superior ethics" that is partially excepted from commu­
nal moral legislation and that implies an exception through
hierarchy; or it is subordinated to a religious affect of radi­cal transcendence that implies an exception by election.

the ethico-philosophical is mendacious, the ethico-religious
anti-democratic. on the other hand, these relations prevent
ethics from positing a truly unconditional imperative since
that of philosophy and that of the religious-transcendent are
even more unconditional than that of ethics. ultimately they
partially subordinate man to ethics, to philosophy and to the
law. the implication of philosophical ethics in particular
is that the law is made circularly by and for man , thus
reciprocally that man is made by and for the law. this
idealism and this voluntarism culminate in the "moral vision
of the world" (kant and fichte), where man's being is reab­sorbed in obedience to commandment or even in the proj­
ect of freedom.
instead, non-philosophy posits that man is the immanent
cause of ethics or that man determines it in-the-last-instance
by excluding the relations of metaphysical causality be­
tween man and ethics. man's essence as radical solitude­
also known as "radical misfortune" of being-foreclosed-is
not directly this cause. it acts as this cause when it takes not
the form of the will, but the form of the existing-stranger­
subject, of f whose ethical modality is here
not the law but force (of) law. the force (of) law does not
derive from the existing law but designates the element of
height or alterity such that it is at least susceptible to being
received in-one and borne by the stranger-subject. in other
words, this non-ethical subject-but for world-ethics-is
deprived of the auto-positionality that would make its es­
sence, for example, into the law as form of duty (kant) or
into the project (fichte), and which still exists in a residual
form and is merely inhibited by the radical transcendence
of the face or of the other* (levinas). radical misfortune,
stranger-subject and force (of) law are the major concepts
of non-ethics because they determine the theoretical and
practical usage of ethics. non-ethics or ethics-according­
to-the-stranger does not claim to create new moralities (cf.
kant) or to be satisfied with giving the rigorous formula of
existing moralities, but invents/discovers the formula for a
new usage of existing moralities and ethics. since this for­
mula is determined by man's rea*l essence alone, non-ethics
is the limitation of inhuman law and inhuman ethics on be­
half of man, who is no longer defined as a reasonable being,
i.e. ultimately as a philosopher, but is defined as "ordinary
man" or stranger. more positively, it universalizes ethics (in
the plural) from the point of view of experience precisely
because it deprives them of their philosophical claim to
define man's essence. by definition it refuses to enter into
the philosophical circularity of world-ethics, and even more
so it refuses to enter into the contemporary marketplace
of ethics. the one thing that alone is good-i.e. human and
only human, in the world and above all outside the world,
i.e. for the world-is force (of) law exerted by the stranger.
but it is only good because the one thing that alone deter­
mines the world's usage is radical misfortune, the solitude of
being-foreclosed or separated.

#non-intuitive
mode of being of thought produced by force (oj) thought on the
basis of materials ofscientific and philosophical representations,
whether intuitive or spontaneously spatialized and temporal­
ized; it only makes visible according to the invisible-of-the-last­
instance, thus without leading thought back to its philosophical
visualization and its philosophical temporalization.

to grasp the problem of space in the constitution of thought,
philosophical labor supposes the interaction, for example, of
three structures of space. the first spatial structuration involves
writing, which according to plato represses speech (myth of
thoth). the classic th inkers are not disturbed by this problemat­
ics of inscription. secondly, space is the portes extra partes, the un­
limited m i l ieu (apeiron) or chaos. lastly. the determinations that
are sti ll spatial visual ize chaos in a positive logos. in plato, these
three structurations are intertwined and constitute phi losophical
order. in kant, space as pure form of intuition is more particu­
larly related to the logos of the categories that discipline the
rhapsody of the sensible. husserl l i ke bergson is on the contrary
disturbed by the idealizing function of mathematized space. the
differentialists go back over writing in its gaps and shifts, some­
times by having topology and sometimes d ifferance dissem inate
space. however; by doing so, they split space, which simultane­
ously becomes both concept and unlimited m i l ieu.their rad ical­
ization does not escape from the redoubl ing interaction of cha­
os and logos. whether explicitly or not (kant, hegel, nietzsche,
heidegger), all of philosophy reinforces thought's spatial intuitivity
by its temporal intuitivity, which is never completely eradicated
despite heidegger's efforts, to the extent that philosophy essen­tially remains a work of world-language.
non-philosophy abandons the differe(a)ntialist spirit, which
does not really avoid the doublet of the empirical and the
transcendental or the doublet of space and time. language
takes on a functional and no longer originary role on behalf
of force (of) thought. this order of the functional is struc­tured in-the-last-instance by vision-in-one which lifts the
supposed necessary intuitivity of thought. with the end of
the relevance attached to its (common and/or philosophi­cal or ontological) intuitivity, language is brought to the so­
called "non-conceptual" state of "words-without-language."
it no longer serves to name being and to make its ultimate
sense appear (whether it be topological or temporal) but is
transformed into the withdrawal of the first terms or "first
names" that enter into the axioms formed in relation to non­-philosophy's objects. if a residue of sensible and ontologi­
cal intuitivity accompanies thought and its "words-without­
language," it only serves as a sort of support for the noemata
that philosophy takes from philosophy's operations and
concepts.this residual intuitivity is transcendent and no lon­ger determines thought's essence as ontology but belongs
to the pure transcendenta*l axiomatics that it has become as
a trace of its occasionale philosophical origin and as a testi­mony to the relative autonomy of the latter. non-philosophy
is the "choice" of the real against the philosophical choice
of space and time, i.e. ultimately the choice of being. more
generally and independently of language, intuition as the ob­ject's mode of representation is here dualyzed into: 1) intu­ition in the philosophical sense, now recognized as auto-in­
tuition and not simply intuition of an object; 2) intuition as
intuited-from-the-start, not as exclusion of all intuition, but
as " simple" intuition or "non-intuitional (of) self" (distance
non-positional (of) self).

#(non-) one
other* name for unilaterality, form of su�pension or invalida­tion which, no longer arising from being but from the one, is
a mode of the one '.5 being-foreclosed, either real and not effec­
tuated ("uni-laterality '') or transcendental and effectuated by
the occasion ofphilosophical "nothingness " ("unilaterality"). it
bears witness to the primacy of (real) foreclosure over (philo­sophical) negation.

from plato to fichte, negation arises from the logico-real order
of an anti-thetic. several philosophers have suspected the con­tingency of negation conceived in this way, i.e. the contingency of
the act of reapplying the logical order onto itself or double nega­tion (hegel). for philosophy, with several exceptions here and
there (bergson) , the category of negation has its reason in non­-being or nothingness/annihilation (heidegger; sartre), whether
accompanied by the negative dialectic or not. contemporary
philosophy replaces negation with more positive experiences of
alterity that mitigate it (difference, multiplicity, dissemination, sin­
gularities, finitude, etc.); nevertheless, the unitary i l l usion remains
unbroken since these substitutions take place only within the l i n­
guistic element and remain conditioned at least by the horizon, if
not of being, of the structure of phi losophical decision.
i n the sciences, the non- is particularly tied to non-classical,
multivalued or intuitionist logics. but the usage of the non- by
which non-philosophy's departure is inspired is that of "non­
euclidean geometry," in the sense that the non- (which has u lti­
mately replaced the expressions "metageometry" or "pangeom­
etry") simultaneously determ ines the limits of the euclidean in
geometry and generalizes the latter. this generalization has been
thought differently depending on how euclidean geometry is un­
derstood as a model of non-euclidean geometry (poincare)­
a position that as such allows for the adm ission of an infinite
number of non-eucl idean geometries-or depending on how
the radical heterogeneity of these geometries is postulated (rus­
sell) and thus their restriction to spaces in constant curvature.
these two attitudes, between which could be ranked those of
riemann, klein, helmholtz, cayley or h i lbert for example, differ
in their interpretation of the role of the axioms, and in particu­
lar those of the so-called "parallel l ines" postulate-"disguised
definition of distance" (poincare) (whence the idea of a
"dictionary" that grants passage from one geometry to another)
-although the interpretation keeps an empirical value for the
other axioms. the treatment of the "non" thus involves various
conceptions of models and of axiomatics, concepts of which
non-philosophy also makes use.
the (non-) one, which is the one's suspending causality on
philosophy and one of the roots of non-philosophy, is not
a negation but an invalidating suspension of philosophy's
claims. non-philosophy is not a negation, no more than non­-euclidean geometry is a non-geometry in its order, but the
identity (of) philosophy unleashed from its principle of suf­ficiency. its essence is the being-foreclosed or real indiffer­
ence of the one and of its immanent uni-versality ("nega­
tive" condition of philosophy's givenness) . the (non-) one
thus itself has a real "negative" form that directly expresses
this foreclosure or this "uni-laterality" of the one and an " ap­
plied" form or "unilaterality" of-the-last-instance that is exert­
ed upon the transcendental unity-among other things-of
philosophical decision.therefore, despite the expression of
"non-philosophy," negation is no longer the recourse for this
thought. only being-foreclosed as rea*l essence can make
possible a non-technological usage of negation to explicate
it or manifest its phenomenal identity outside its metaphysi­
cal sense. non-philosophy abandons negation and nothing­
ness, their mitigated forms as well as their metaphysical
forms, for the same reason that it is delivered from being­
i.e. from the recourses of philosophy. the "non-euclidean
metaphor" is thus subordinated to being-foreclosed, just as
the "non-euclidean" generalization of philosophy is subordi­
nated to vision-in-one's immanent uni-versality.

#non-philosophy
autonomous and specific discipline of an identically scientific
and philosophical type that describe!r-in-the-last-instance ac­cording to the one-real and by means of philosophy and of
science considered as material-on the one hand force (of
thought or the existing-stranger-su�ject, and on the other hand
the object offorce (ofj thought, which is the identity (of world­
thought.

non-philosophy is regarded by philosophy either as the state
of immediacy of naive and sensible opinion (the judgments of
common sense) , or as its other that remains to be thought (sci­ences, technologies, pol itics, arts . . . ), or as the presuppositions of
philosophy itself (the innumerable "unthoughts") that are in turn
philosoph izable. merleau-ponty's report concerning post-hege­lian thinkers (kierkegaard, nietzsche, marx . . . ) is quite revealing
when he wonders whether our century "does not enter an age
of non philosophy." but the expression primari ly has a negative,
even devalorizing content that can become posit ive, l ike in the
contemporary th inkers of difference such as derrida (cf. posi­tions) , and especially deleuze (cf. what is philosophy?) who syn­thesizes to the extreme this still quite "negative" vagueness, which
is at bottom thoughts of the other*, by writing: "the philosopher
must become non-philosopher so that non-philosophy becomes
the earth and people of philosophy."
distinct from this becoming that intertwines being and dif­
ference, vision-in-one (as immanent and manifest real) is
the transcendental "thread" of a consistent non-philosophi­
cal thought that is positively distinct from this current non
philosophical type drifting in the nooks and crannies of phi­
losophy.
non-philosophy is an autonomous and specific disci­
pline that has its own concepts (one-real, vision-in-one,
first science, cloning . . . ); its own theoretical operations,
which are transcendental by their real or in-one cause (in­
duction and deduction); its own non-autopositional prag­
matic rules; its own objects, which are philosophically un­
decidable as such-the one, being, the other*, being, each
of which, non-philosophically transformed, respectively
give: the one-real; the aprioristic structure of representa­
tion; the philosophical as worl*d-thought's principle of re­
sistance; the chaotic universe (of) multiple representations
obtained by the acting of the one-cause upon philosophical
material as form of world.autonomy signifies the epistemic
break (being-foreclosed, determination-in-the-last-instance,
unilaterality, the dual . . . ) between non-philosophical pos­ture and philosophical decision. non-philosophy's speci­
ficity means a strictly immanent (pragmatic and theo­retical) practice for philosophy but also for the sciences,
art . . . with determined rules, like, for example, the rule of
the chora, the suspension of philosophical authority and
the transformation of philosophy into material.
non-philosophy is from the start a theory by or accord­
ing to the one, therefore a unified theory of science and of
philosophy. it is simultaneously a theoretical, practical and
critical discipline that is distinct from philosophy without
being a meta-philosophy. it is specified in accordance with
the regional material inserted into the structure of philo­sophical decision (non-aesthetics, non-ethics, etc.).

#non-psychoanalysis
real and transcendental uni-versalization of psychoanalysis
that suspends its theoretical authority rather than its objects
(unconscious, identification, symptom, etc.) by relating it to
the real as vision-in-one instead of an ultimate philosophical
definition of the real. non-psychoanalysis is the unified (not
unitary or auto-legitimizing) theory ofpsychoanalysis and phi­
losophy.

all philosophy is by definition anti-psychoanalytic instead of non­
psychoanalytic insofar as it lays claim to being or to the tran­
scendent other*. by its very essence it denies (sartre) or ignores
(lei bniz, "tiny perceptions") the autonomy or immanent alterity
of the unconscious. on the contrary, psychoanalysis affirms by its
essence the irreducibility of the unconscious to any phi losophi­
cal operation. this incompatibility does not exclude that certain
philosophers (ricceur; deleuze, henry, derrida) , even certain
analysts (to begin with, lacan) , have attempted variously al lergic
combinations that would bind these two domains, particularly
around the notion of a supposed subject (of the unconscious).
lacan notably believed to be able to affirm-before m ichel
henry, whose research would confirm this genealogy if it were
authentically analytic-that the subject of the unconscious is the
cartesian subject.
on its side in an u ltimate homage to philosophical authority,
psychoanalysis lays claim to its own autonomy, its sufficiency and
the critique of philosophy. the reciprocal yet each time unequal
bind of philosophy and psychoanalysis is the ariadne's thread
leading through the labyrinth of 20th century "continental "
thought and the background from which psychoanalysis' claims of
autonomy stand out.these types of unitary relations inaugurated
by the "judaic turn" of thought at the beginning of this century
only allows imagining-the concept does not (yet) exist in this
framework-a q u ite restrained form of "non-psychoanalysis,"
for example through a simple transference of the non-euclidean
style. the de-biologization, de-psychologization and topological
generalization of psychoanalysis, along with the primacy-all car­ried out by lacan-of theory over the system, are undoubtedly
the most fruitful tendencies in the transformation of psychoanal­ysis (not by its own means but under its own authority and under
that of worl*d-thought) and preparation of non-psychoanalysis.
non-philosophy becomes concrete and is exposited in vari­ous "unified theories" or theories according-to-the-one in­
the-last-instance . in particular, it substitutes a unified the­
ory of psychoanalysis and of philosophy in their conflated,
unstable and violent relations. from this perspective, simul­
taneously by its own necessity and by that which the laca­
nian occasion offers it, non-philosophy reorganizes every
analytic problematics, including the real/symbolic/imagi­
nary structure, around the primacy of the real and of the
one but understood as vision-in-one, which is foreclosed to
the order of knowledge, of thought and, but not only, of the
symbolic. any sort of knot between any circle merely ties
these essential instances into a structure or simultaneity, but
a series of clonings articulates the real and worl*d-thought.
for example, if lacau-thought is given as simple material, it
is necessary, on the one hand, to treat its philosophico-ana­
lytic complex as the imaginary object of non-psychoanalysis
and to treat the symbolic and in general all the structures of
the unconscious and the other* as occasion and symptom
of the transcendental and aprioristic instances of a non-ana­
lytic "subject" whose universal matrix is given by force (of)
thought. from this point of view, all these analytic instances
are transformed and displaced: the unconscious itself, the
other*, object, symptom, identification, desire, jouissance,
etc. on the other hand, the structural and "borromean" forcibly unitary, circular and knotted-organization of these
instances ultimately gives way to a cloning process.the real
clones non-analytic instances on the basis of the philosoph­
ico-analytic given.

unified theory therefore radically differs from the synthe­
ses described, which it considers as mixtures that altogether
constitute the imaginary, or the philosophico-analytic symp­tom. hence: the dyads of subject and object, conscious and
unconscious, signifier and signified, metaphor and metony­my in their ante-pragmatic usage in a large number of laca­nian analysts or several "derridanalysts."
the real-which unified theory will call in this particu­lar case the enjoyed or joui-sansjouissance-is given an­
terior to the imaginary, or the transcendental appearance
of the philosophico-analytic. the enjoyed is distinct from
jouissance, which is furthermore so poorly defined that a
number of contemporary analysts willingly identify it with
the unconscious. the real-contrary to what goes on in
lacan's privational ontology (adequate-to the exclusion
of all others-to the freudian discovery)-is never lacking
even though it is of itself radically foreclosed.
radicaljouissance is just as distinct from ''jouissance" as
from the philosophico-analytic mixture characterized as re­
turn of the repressed, subversion of the subject,jouissance
of the other*, phallic jouissance, even jouissance of being
or the open, i.e. the proliferations of disseminated signifiers
where what is completely lost, just like in '']ouissance," is
the one-experience of the enjoyed. non-psychoanalysis ad­
mits jouissance as the stranger's analogon, organon of the
enjoyed as cause-of-the-last-instance of the unconscious.
therefore, this would be a jouissance that is connected
neither to a mixture nor symptom (which marks a decisive
rupture with psychiatry). the unconscious-non-signifying
(of) self-will be spoken of in this respect without any sig­
nifier intervening to overdeterminejouissance.
the fundamental tendencies of this privational ontology
in lacan-rather than those of subtractive ontology-con­
stitute the privileged but not only material submitted to
non-psychoanalysis. this is because it is not a question of
destroying psychoanalysis but of transforming it into ma­terial-object and occasion of a different, more rigorous and
more universal knowledge. one of non-psychoanalysis's ob­jectives is to put an end to the confused conflict between
philosophy and psychoanalysis: by universalizing the latter
under conditions which are no longer philosophical and
scientific (mathematical) but in-one-in-the-last-instance, by
making theoretical and pragmatic activity prevail over its
system, and ultimately by establishing the theory of a non­
analytic subject. rather than the discourse of the other*,
non-psychoanalysis is the discourse of the stranger-of-the­
last-instance, of man as existing-stranger.

#non-rhetoric
usage of rhetoric and of its philosoph ical deployment in accor­dance with vision-in-one. more than a philosophically "gen­eralized rhetoric, " it is a uni-versal rhetoric for worl*d-thought.

primarily, rhetoric is less a specific domain than an organon. n ev­
ertheless, classical philosophy treated it specifically as fulfilling two
functions: ornamentation-which is to be excluded if one wants
to grasp the "whole dry truth" (leibniz)-and persuasion, wh ich
was confined at best to writi ngs classified as "synthetic" (for ex­
ample, the principles of philosophy or the monadology), writings
more likely to be read by those who allow themselves to be
led too much by the imagination. philosophy excl udes rhetoric
to protect itself from the inessential and the ignorant. as wel l as
from the multiplicity of other contemporary philosophies (this
is why it nevertheless requires a force of conviction) and the
existence of autonomous exteriorities. it internalizes the latter by
postulating a non rhetorical usage of language (in an unhyphen­
ated, negative and restrained sense) to protect itself from the
mod ifications and falsifications that remain unmastered by it.the
relations between classical phi losophy and classical rhetoric wi ll
then be all the more complex, because the latter would also sup­
pose a simple and natural manner of speaking in order to be able
to evaluate figures and turns, and because this simplicity has been
founded on a non-figural figure, "catachresis" or dead metaphor
(cf. in particular fontanier). the m oderns have taken account of
the ambiguous complexity of these relations, either weakly by
postulating that philosophy seeks to convince the public of its
readers (perelmann-obrecht-tytecka), or more strongly by pos­tulating a philosophical anaphora as veritable gesture of founda­tion (souriau). in effect, after it is admitted that all interpretations
of philosophy belong to it, even the most contradictory ones
(leibniz, german idealism) , rhetoric can invest all philosophy.
but it is particularly with and after nietzsche, around him, that
rhetoric becomes an explicit theme which invests a field equiva­lent to being and which organ izes being's modes of manifesta­
tion. like the signifier; rhetoric is then more or less strategically
required in order to sem i-objectively describe the operations or
gestures of philosophy (derrida, galay) . margins, dissemi nations,
cinders, monstrosity, obliqueness, the other*; etc. become philo­sophical terms on the same rank as classical themes; they even
appear at least as the partial conditions of their apprehension.
there is thus no truth without rhetoric. all metaphor is not cata­chresis but metaphor of metaphor; the classical example appear­
i ng as rhetorical turn. it is not a question of reducing philosophy
to rhetoric but of bracketing the ontology in phi losophy. this is
the sense of a "general ized rhetoric," the active affirmation of the
other* or of the drive in philosophy.
it is not up to general ized rhetoric to specify these intervals
but to administer their ensemble into distinct singularities: th is is a
transcendental rule of the relations between forms and contents,
between syntaxes and themes, between multiplicities and exte­
riorities. therefore rhetoric is both the means and metastable
variance of intervals, i.e. the variance of differences of phi losophi­
cal potentials. phi losophy only conserves the rhetoric that makes
possible the distinction and mastery of alterity and exteriority
according to its own doublet structure or structure of redoubl ing
(of simulacra). it even becomes (cf. n ietzsche) the possibility of
an almost rigorous reversibility between philosophy and its al­
terities, its exteriorities, in such a way that phi losophy does not
become lost but is conserved in its consistency and its coherence
by being given the means to master these ensembles of relations.
hence deleuze's extreme thesis: there is no metaphor; which is
the opposite of general ized rhetoric.
freed from philosophical sufficiency, non-philosophy
neither has to reduce " turns" to the example or denial of
rhetoric, nor to exclude the multiplicity of philosophies
that are founded upon resorting to it. on the contrary, it
frees rhetoric in order to enrich and modify the philosophi­
cal material. as non-spatializing, it permits recognition in
being and the discourse of all possible spaces, even those
founding the distance that each philosophy provides
to the empirical that is given to it, a distance from what
it constructs in accordance with its transcendentals, or
even from what it calls "real." the rules for the material's
transformation are insufficient to rhetoric and, consequent­
ly, free it from its philosophical restrictions.
"non-rhetoric" is language's manifestation according to
the one-which is not language-but such that it is no lon­ger measured by an efficacy (persuasion) or an inefficacy
(the obscuring of relations of transparency to the real). this
aforementioned division between force of conviction and
force of transparency has no place here, for it merely rein­forces philosophical divisions and hierarchies. let us simply
speak of a force (of) language that transforms the relations
of transparency and of conviction. non-rhetoric treats each
of these relations as identities and no longer seeks to distin­guish in the usage of a metaphor between what is "properly"
philosophical and what is not: the distinction between dis­ciplines is no longer subordinated to philosophy. " style" will
denote the "strangerhoods" [etrangeites] that are no longer
related to the non-figural or to the normal but each under­
stood as identity (of the) philosophical and (of the) non­-philosophical. every approach will be able to be recognized
as individuated, each turn or figure treated as a mode of the
stranger-subject's identity. nothing can then limit the play
of figures: they are each proper names of the identities of
the ego and of the stranger. style simply posits the identity
of heterogeneous elements without seeking to reduce them
in accordance with a supposed normative or fundamental
layer of language. thus rhetoric is no longer evaluated ac­
cording to representational contents or limited in view of
the control and mastery of alterity so as to protect a certain
traditional image of thought. considered as identities rather
than as relations or differences of potential, figures can be
posited in-the-last-instance either as radically different or in­
dividuated without adding an active relation of indifference
between these two solutions, for here it is no longer a ques­
tion of dividing and hierarchizing being.

#non-sufficiency
the "principle " of in-sufficient real is that which alone invali­dates without remainder (ifnot that of a material) the principle
of sufficient reason and its universalization, the principle of
sufficient philosophy. it signifies that the real as vision-in-one is
a uni-versa! but simply negative condition, necessary but non­-sufficient, and that it must be effectuated by the givenness of
worl*d-thought. it is not insufficient in itself but "radical" rather
than "absolute " and becomes insufficient in relation to thought:
it is indifferent therefore as cause or principle.

the real, such as it is posited by philosophical decisions in ap­proximation with which various operations are reciprocally
determined, is of a completely relative insufficiency. it requires
decisions of thought even in its essence because thought has
already contributed to defining it and affects its essence-this is
the system of its insufficient sufficiency. it forms with thought a
system of sufficiency or of the absolute which takes on the name
"philosophy" and is expressed in different layers of philosophical
decision (faith-in-the-real, transcendental-and-real un ity, autopo­
sitional transcendence, philosophy's primacy-and-priority over
regional knowledges, etc.). philosophy can be described in this
way, but only in partial or particular descriptions (according to
some decision, etc.) that misrecognize these descriptions' sense
(of) identity.
precisely because it is radical (and not absolute), the real's
sufficiency, that of its immanence without desire or need
for thought, implies an insufficiency that is just as "radical"
as far as the thought which could be developed accord­
ing to it and on its basis is concerned. from this point of
view, non-philosophy is articulated through a "principle"
of the real's non-sufficiency which invalidates-by dualyz­
ing them-the principles of reason and of sufficient phi­
losophies, which are mixtures. the real is not a problem,
it is the presupposed due to which thought becomes a
problem rather than a question. but the real contributes
nothing except the specific uni-versality of vision-in-one.
it is also necessary to bring to it the world in thought's
form, thus in philosophy's form, but now as the simple
"occasionale" material or the field of properties that
makes transcendental and empirical effectuation possible.
if the real is itself foreclosed to the world, thought is in­stead not foreclosed to the latter, and vision-in-one " ex­
tracts" it from the mixture that it forms with the world. the
real's non-sufficiency is completely positive and concerns
nothing but its function of cause in relation to thought. it
justifies the recourse to an experience-undoubtedly spe­cial because this is the experience that philosophy has be­
come-and legitimizes non-philosophy's claim of possess­
ing an experimental aspect without being an experimental
discipline in the positive sense.

#non-technology
unified theory of technics and philosophy. it takes as material
or object their unitary relations of techno-scientific mixture
and above all the engineering science�engineering-which
it treats as this mixture 's neighboring symptom. unified theory
extracts from them a thought vis-a-vis qualitatively different
and transcendentally distinct orders (of) identity. it relates the
technico-philosophical complex along with its ideologies (omni­
technology, technologism, techno-science, end of philosophy,
etc.) to the real which makes the critique of these illusions pos­
sible and determines these heterogeneous orders in-the-last-in­
stance.

the term "technology" has a minor but momentous history whose
invariant is the articulation of technics and logos. it first designated
the limited domain of the description of know-hows, of their tools
and ingredients, and now designates the mixtures of techniques
and sciences in their interpretations and their political, economic
and social usages.this latter preference ultimately tends to identify
technology with the knowledge of networks, systems and com­
plexity, since its essence is to articulate heterogeneous elements
on all levels and orders.this concept thus almost naturally finds its
place in monist philosophies and sociologies, in the sense that the
real is identified with the complexity of networks. scientific tech­
niques, due to their limitation, can function in networks, but the
continuities are privileged as soon as technology is considered the
silent and omnipresent transcendental of so-called "post-modern"
society, whose philosophical finesse is exerted in a sort of skeptical
relativism where the grand categories of man, science and labor
appear as products of networks and lose their autonomy.

the philosophical critique of th is concept consists in com pos­ing its genealogy and showing that it is the result of the reversal and
intensification of a narrow and reductive conception of science
characterized by the opposition of theory and experience, and
thus, in approximation with several displacements here and there,
the opposition of the logos and technics. by contrast, philosophy
does not destroy the amphibology essential to this concept that
would al low it to extract its most positive value.technology ap­pears like the schematizing articulation of two heterogeneous
orders.the first is formed by various multiplicities of finite events
or problems, both technical and scientific-th is is somewhat a
question of the engineering sciences in their broadest sense. the
second is its imaginary continuation and total ization which func­tions in the manner of a schematism that relates these events to
being. technology thus has two types of existence, almost always
conflated, which makes it oscillate between the engineering sci­ences and philosophy. in a single stroke this inequality confers the
traits of competency and humanism upon it, often considered
as the foundations of the good in democracy. the defi n itions of
technology are then seen to be too narrow and philosophy itself
is seen to be technology: the latter explaining the former.
non-philosophy is not content with treating technologism
as a transcendental illusion. it takes the technological dis­courses and metadiscourses seriously but as a disguised de­
scription of what would make us forget the illusion: that
which is "at the heart" of the epistemological opposition
between "theory" and "experience," between "logos" and
"technics." in effect, the engineering sciences, which almost
have no place in classical epistemology and which are in
certain way the "truth" of technology, are its symptom. the
transformation of technological statements outside " suffi­ciency" allows for these sciences to emerge and makes it
possible to designate a broader and more specific concep­tion of them by destroying the epistemological limits of the
classical concept of science and by renewing the compre­
hension of its technical usages.
the engineering sciences are not completely indepen­dent of the classical image of science but imply a new rela­tion to scientific knowledges. they do not define domains
and are more difficult to identify than the classical scienc­es. they are instead generic disciplines capable of treating
widely different problems in terms of project or objective.
thus they articulate multiple levels of "concreteness" and
knowledges of different origins: models then become more
important than theories in the resolution of problems.
theory appears as a "theoretical given," simultaneously as
condition of knowledge and of compatibility of the mod­els employed in this project. this is one of the reasons why
engineering is often identified with design (cad or cadd)
and divided by philosophy between analysis and concep­tion, or even between the formal character of knowledges
and of the articulation of models on the one hand, and the
empirical and sensible content of the technologies they
modify on the other hand.
non-philosophy refuses this division and posits an iden­tity-of-the-last-instance that allows for the specification of
the engineering sciences in light of their technoscientific
and epistemological interpretations. the usage of theory by
the engineering sciences is then not characterizable by eco­
nomic, political or ideological extensions and projections,
but by the fact that its knowledges are indecomposable
in-the-last-instance, whatever their investments in models
might be. this identity allows for the possibility of a radi­cal distinction between the conception of engineering and
the philosophical project: the constraints of an engineer's
problem are defined internal to his project, such that the
engineer discovers at the same time as he invents. similarly,
the multiplicities of the engineering sciences are neither
unifying nor sensible like those of philosophy: their identity
does not depend upon the terms it unifies; on the contrary,
it is what guarantees the identity of the most heterogeneous
terms.
non-philosophy therefore dualyzes the concept of tech­
nology elaborated in the occasion of the systematic encoun­ter of the classical sciences and technics. consequently, it
distinguishes the engineering sciences from the ethical dis­courses which continually accompany it as the substitute of a
deficient ideology. if ethics merely concerns prosthetic bod­ies and philosophical anthropoids but definitely not man as
stranger-subject, and yet non-philosophy posits the latter, the
ethical problem transforms into a non-ethical problem, radi­cally distinct from that of technology: only a transcendental
illusion conflates them. technology will then lose its
function of grand transcendental-similar to what pre­
viously happened to the categories of history and lan­guage - and its imaginary dimensions on their side will be
effectively assumed by fiction and science-fiction.

#occasion
said of the specific causality ofphilosophy or worl*d-thought in
general vis-a-vis the causality of the one or the real, the de­termination-in-the-last-instance. this concept th us belongs to
non-philosophy rather than to philosophy itself it is the non­
philosophical sense or the noema that the causality of philoso­phy receives, which is the one 'sforeclosure-in-the-last-instance.

occasion stems from a double register. in practical and everyday
ethics, it is a notion simi lar to that of kairos but having a distinct
temporality. in metaphysics, it has given rise to the "occasionalist"
theory of malebranche who attributes the real ity of causal ity to
god alone and thus reduces physical causal ity to functions of
simple impulse and relays.
to vision-in-one, the ultimate and necessary but non-suf­ficient ("negative") point of view, an object can be given
thereby effectuating it. enjoying a relative autonomy, this
givenness of an other*-than-the-real is certainly indispens­able, but it can only be formed on condition of the real, i.e.
on condition of its determination-in-the-last-instance by the
latter. such a real suspension of philosophy's causality is the
suspension of its real, then transcendental, illusion. it does
not destroy philosophy's own mechanism but transforms
the sense or the relevance that it is spontaneously attrib­uted as worl*d-thought possessing all possible causality and a
unitary causality that it believes to be the real. occasionality
is therefore the "noematic" sense to which determination-in­
the-last-instance reduces the alleged causality of philosophy.
due to this sense, philosophical causality reduced as such
will not be called "occasional" but "occasionale."the merely
occasionale status of philosophy is specified in turn by the
three functions that it then fulfills in the constitution of non­
philosophy or force (of) thought: a function of nomination
or symbolic support for the first terms of non-philosophy;
a function of symptomatic indication by which philosophy
is indicated or brought to the attention of vision-in-one, for
example as transcendental structure or even as a priori and
transcendence; lastly, a function said of material for clon­ing through which it allows the one to clone a function of
radical transcendental identity in the likeness of itself; then
to clone a function of a priori identity in the likeness of
itself as philosophical a priori. the real does not univert
itself-it is already universal-but there is an agent of its ef­fectuation, and it is the philosophical occasion, specifically
its sense of occasionale causality.

#mystique
usage of mystique in accordance with the instance of radical
immanence, of the one-in-one, which is itselfcalled "the " mys­tical. although foreclosed to thought, the mystical is the negative
universal condition of man as stranger.

"mystique" designates the experience of a supposed immediate
and rationally impenetrable access to a transcendent order of
real ity. on the one hand, it is a question of an immediate supra­-rational or supra-discursive-even supra-intuitive-coincidence
that proceeds without the aid of a form or a concept. on the
other hand, the access-cal led "mystical" because it forms the
"inspiration" or "recesses" of the soul or that of a super- or non­
human cal ling-to a phenomenon that is revealed but exceeds
the possibilities of language, follows the path of an identification
immanent to a transcendent order of real ity always supposed as
the authentic real or a real beyond the limits of d iscourse and
language. since it is a question of the transcendence of a superes­
sential god in the immanence of the (christian mystical) soul or
of a reality that is revealed without being able to be spoken in
the manner of an alterity (wittgenstein), this excess, so as to be
able to be cal led "mystical," should not be a simple delimitation,
lack or absence as in deconstruction, but an ekstasis, be it blocked
or prohibited, a phenomenal given or an experience of transcen­dence given "in person" in the mode of i mmanence.
if all philosophical concepts of mystique or of the mystical
are polarized by transcendence qua supposed object of an
immanent experience, non-philosophy reduces the mystical
to designate immanence alone, but having become for itself
its own phenomenal given or the real. "mystique" is a pos­sible nomination for the essence of the real or of vision-in­
one . the reduction of transcendence, of its ekstatic essence
and of its religious modalities, only suspends mystique and
mysticism properly conceived, but saves the phenomenon
that mystical experience, its reality, is and makes it deploy
its uni-versality into the heart of thought. real or mysti­cal identity thus "precedes" mystical identification, since it
determines-in-the-last-instance the usage of discourse and
language, without thereby giving rise to the aporias of an
undecidability or an ineffability of "negative theology." on
the contrary, mystical experience is the contents of a new
non-theological usage of language as real because it is now
radically immanent and without ekstasis but not without
uni-versality. in it the logos stops denying itself in the name
of the immanence of a transcendence, thus in the name of
an antinomic reciprocation that implies the autonomy of
the logos with itself. it is suspended by a force (of) thought,
which no doubt possesses a grasp on language but which,
on its side and by its rea*l essence, is not grasped by the
latter. because the mystical thus understood is only an im­manent cause by its essence, and consequently in radical
heteronomy to the logos, the non-philosophical usage of
language does not result in a negative henology, for the ne­gation or suspension of the logos no longer belongs to the
essence of the real cause or of the mystical since it still be­
longs to the religious relation to a superessential being.
whereas philosophy calls " mystical " the real that it
touches or approaches in a transcendence, or even beyond,
but which it cannot penetrate since it remains content with
an intuition or representation that it denies, non-philosophy
takes its departure in the real itself as a given-without-given­
ness mystical: on this universal yet non-sufficient basis, it
endeavors to transform our relation to philosophy, science,
art-to mystique itself, whose non-philosophical and non­
religious a prioris it extracts. from this perspective, it is not
a question of a secularization-still rational and transcen­dent-of an extraordinary experience, but of the possibility
of giving back to every "ordinary man" the usage of an ex­ceptional or superhuman experience that was supposed to
be refused to him. philosophy is this organon, this a priori
form which, giving us the world, forecloses the mystical ex­
perience that intrinsically constitutes humans and that must
be recovered, not in its reality which has never abandoned
us, but in the mode of thought and by its non-philosophical
force. the mystical is the rea*l essence of the stranger and
that which turns him, that which uni-verts him to the world.

#other*
aprioristic structure which is a mode offorce (of) thought and
of the non-autopositional distance that belongs to it. it corre­sponds with the symptom-material of transcendence, yet only
insofar as the latter is not reduced to simple exteriority or dis­tance but adds a "vertical " dimension of alterity or height to it.

the philosophical history of the other* is punctuated by three ep­
ochs. i ) the other* as belonging to the same or expulsed by it, as
deprived of being and more or less identical to the pure multiple
or simulacrum (plato) . 2) the other* as real opposition, existence
irreducible to logic (kant) . this other* founds the modern con­
cept of the subject as denying its particularity and as transcen­
dent toward itself. but it is ultimately able to be absorbed again in
rational autoposition. 3) the other* of judaic and psychoanalytical
extraction characterized by a real transcendence affecting the
ideal transcendence of the logos (derrida) . proper to the "judaic
turn" and posterior to nietzsche, this other* marks alterity's "way
out" of philosophy, or real excess over it, but always under philos­
ophy's supposed ultimate authority. furthermore, since the other*
is grasped d ialectically as alterity from both the theoretical angle
(plato) and the practical angle (fichte) , all philosophy of the oth­
er as such is consequently driven into a speculation leading up to
the fiction of an other* of the other*; which psychoanalysis (lacan)
tries to prohibit. on the other hand, when ethics instead tends to
become first, indeed an-archic (levinas), the other* is grasped as
identity of an absolute other* or infinite distance (of the) "most­
h igh." but when this j udaic other* affects philosophy itself, the
rigor of this identity is again attenuated and the other* is menaced
by redoubling-this is differance (double, proxy, supplement, vi­cariousness, etc. cf. derrida) .
against the philosophical amphibology of the other*, it is
advisable to distinguish between a transcendence of pure
exteriority or of ek-stasis-completely non-horizontal, i.e.
non-autopositional and non-autodecisional position, orga­non of thought-and the secondary dimension of an alter­
ity of real transcendence whose symptoms are ethics and
theology and whose manifestation constitutes the specific
organon of a non-ethics and of a non-religion.
the experience of alterity implies a non-autopositional
transcendence prohibiting both the absolute levinasian
reversal of the hierarchy of being for the other* as well as
the derridean semi-dialectization of this reversal under the
name of differance.this dialectization implies that the other*
be present only as symptom instead of being performatively
given, but in vision-in-one in-the-last-instance . there is an
identity of-the-last-instance of the other*, and this objective
structure is not obtained by the reversal of a philosophical
hierarchy but given one time each time without being able
to be divided: this is the other* such as it is and not as such,
with its own acting in force (of) thought.
vision-in-one is not the vision-in-the-other* (cf. lacan:
"discourse of the other*"), which would make the other*
first. it no longer presents the one and the other* as a mix­
ture that supports a thought of relation a la psychoanalysis:
the other* is not the one's immanent content, but strictly its
last transcendent(al) condition.
the existing-stranger-subject is defined by force (of)
thought, and alterity is here no more than one of its specifi­cations. in contrast with philosophy, non-philosophy distin­guishes three concepts that are entangled in the generality
of the "other*" : 1) the immanent uni-versality of vision-in
one, which gives the world without-givenness or is avail­able for it, uni-verted to it; 2) non-autopositional distance
or exteriority; 3) lastly its modality of real alterity or of "ver­tical" transcendence. alterity is an ethical specification of
stranger-existing, but the latter is not itself essentially de­fined by this alterity-as philosophy would like to define it
with its dyad of ego and alter-ego. the "other*" or "alterity"
with its various ancient and recent modes is nothing but a
symptom of the existing-stranger subject. in its beginnings,
non-philosophy itself with the term of"non-thetic transcen­dence" (ntt) did not distinguish these three layers.

#performativity
term borrowedfrom the philosophy of ordinary language (aus­
tin and searle), transposed and generalized here outside the
linguistic sphere to characterize the radical type of immanence
and of the one 's acting, compared to the efficacy of language
and of being in a philosophical or logos regime.

in the sphere of language, performative is said of certain enun­
ciations in which the signifying value and the value of action, the
sense and the operation, the signified and the practice, are sup­
posed to be identical to one another: they "do what they say," or
more precisely: they do somethi ng (and do not content them­
selves with saying it) by saying this very thing or by the act of say­
ing it (austi n) . this concept has been critiqued by ducrot ( 1 980
and 1 984) as i l l usory, arising from a "confusion committed by
lingu ists between the words they study and the words they use,
a confusion furthermore prefigured in the language itself insofar
as it is the place of a delocutive derivation that conceptual izes the
words it makes avai lable for the speaking subject."
if there is now supposed, as non-philosophical practice au­
thorizes, a radical identity of saying and doing (doing (by-)
saying, saying (by-) doing), but an identity which is no lon­
ger itself of the order of doing or saying, the only instance
that is defined by this identity, without exception and with­
out sufficiency, is the one, i.e. the real itself such as it is
defined by a pure immanence or an inherence (to) self of
the phenomenon. the real is performative because it is giv­
en-without-givenness by knowing (itself) given in this way
without this knowledge still being opposed to a transcen­
dent object. the non-philosophical usage therefore mani­
fests the phenomenal or real kernel that is at the basis of
this concept, which, despite everything, is always somewhat
divisible and effectively illusory within the usage that the
philosophy of language makes of it. in particular, the non­
philosophical usage restores its verbal and active dimension
to it and inscribes performativity in the real's radical pas­sivity: one could speak of "passive performativity," of which
husserl's "passive synthesis" would give a first but still tran­scendent indication.

thus understood as cause in-the-last-instance of thought,
radical performativity manages to dismantle its antinomic
coupling with the "constative" function of language; it grad­ually introduces its identity-in-the-last-instance into the lin­guistic couplings that it "unilateralizes" outside the real. on
its behalf, it prohibits the reflexive and philosophical usage
of language and shows that in non-philosophy language
is called forth without being uttered from its own depths
since it speaks from or through the real alone or according
to it.
if performativity designates the immanence of force (of)
thought, which only arises from itself, i.e. in-the-last-instance
from the real alone, it radicalizes the marxist criterion of
practice that specifically designated a certain real imma­nence against the transcendence of ideology, namely that
of philosophy. practice as performativity will be opposed to
practice as scission (hegel), eventually by also calling it "pas­sive" ("passive practice" ; cf. "praxis" according to m. henry).
force (of) thought is identically in-the-last-instance passive
(descartes) and active (spinoza)-this is another possible
reading of performativity.
lastly, for more rigor and axiomatic clarity, the performed­
without-performation or the already-performed (the one-re­al itself, not the result of action but the phenomenal state-of­
affairs that is immanent (to) self) will be distinguished from
performation as activity or work of force (of) thought upon
its material. it is performational-immanent in its specific
mode-without being the performed itself.

#philosophical decision
philosophy 's principal and formalized invariant or structure:
according to philosophy, which does not indicate it without also
simultaneously auto-affecting it and affecting its own identity;
according to non-philosophy, which this time gives it a radical
identity (oj) structure or which determines it in-the-last-instance.
its synonyms: dyad and unity, amphibology, unity-of-contrar­ies, mixture, blend in rare likely even to have a double usage,
intra-philosophical and non-philosophical, that changes its
sense. philosophical decision is a mixture of indecision and
decision, never pure decision.

i ) decision i n the trad itionalrational sense is the act-deter­mined by reasons of the structural, cyclical or individual (choice)
order-by which the individual puts an end to a deliberation. the
economist and special ist in artificial science, ha simon, defines it
as: 'the process at the end of which at each moment one chooses
one of these alternatives. the series of decisions that determine
behavior duri ng a given amount of time can be called a strategy."
2) philosophical decision, variable according to the philosophers
considered, corresponds with a certain i nvariant distribution­
whether explicit or repressed-of transcendental and empirical
functions. i n relation to a set of so-called "empirical" facts, or a
"technico-experimental" labor; etc., the philosopher reactivates
the decision of the question-which he considers fundamen­
tal-of the essence of phenomena. he makes a double d istinc­
tion, that of the empirical and the a priori, whatever it be; then
that of the a priori and the transcendental, which is a return to
what he cal ls commencement, the originary, substance, being, etc.,
but which is always the supposed authentic real equipped with
transcendental functions (in a broad sense) . 3) these concepts
obviously have been general ized and critiqued in deconstruction
and the philosophies of difference by the neighboring concepts
of games, effects and strategies. but the empirical, a priori, tran­scendental and real levels are structural invariants and are not
simply valid for kant and husserl, provided that they are under­
stood as invariants and not as entities or essences.
philosophical decision is an operation of transcendence
that believes (in a naive and hallucinatory way) in the pos­sibility of a unitary discourse on the real. this authoritarian
claim is expressed by autoposition, an operation made pos­sible by its being of mixture or amphibology. philosophical
decision as structure involves the coupling, then the unity,
of contraries, and its function is to hallucinate the one-real
and to foreclose it in this way. to philosophize is to decide
on the real and on thought, which ensues from it, i.e. to be­
lieve to be able to align them with the universal order of the
principle of reason (the logos), but also more generally in
accordance with the "total" or unitary order of the principle
of sufficient philosophy. whence the amphibologies that re­late to the real (as being . . . ) and to thought (as philosophy)
and which are both the element and the result of the au­to-decisional process. this includes the various operations
that are the fundamental moments of any philosophical
decision and to which, in a non-auto-decisional form, the
transcendental and a priori identity of the subject of non­
philosophy, i.e. force (of) thought, corresponds. because
philosophical decision is a formalization of philosophy that
is itself philosophical, it is used globally as a symptomatic
indication and occasion for the elaboration of force (of)
thought which, in addition, has for its " correlate" the iden­tity, the sense (of) identity, of philosophical decision, which
is valid as foreclosure of the real or of the one.

#philosophy
object (occasion, material, symptom) of non-philosophy.

when it tries to think itself rather than practice itself sponta­
neously and naively, phi losophy is for itself the object of a half­
saying, of a half-definition or of a game of speeches and silences.
the true phi losopher's pred icament is to say "the" philosophy.
phi losophical systems are an aborted or endangered effort to say
what philosophy is, to dissimulate the impossibility of saying it, to
avoid having to keep silent.
philosophy is an a priori discourse on the one hand with
a systematic goal on the other. it posits the world whose
being is pre-formed in the logos with a predicative struc­ture. this predicative structure of philosophical discourse
is organized into a speculative reflection, as the last abso­lute philosophy shows (hegel). the essence of speculative
reflection is specularity, or dyadic. after parmenides, the su­ture of being and thinking forms the unsurpassable mirror
stage of philosophy. certainly after heidegger, deconstruc­tive philosophers are trying to break the mirror by substitut­ing it for the specularity of being and its residue dispersed
or disseminated by the other*. however, this other* of the
logos has efficacy only in one last obligated reference to
the logos, which is supposed relevant for the real. philo­sophical decision has become a forcing.at least since plato
it homogenizes, idealizes, quantifies and qualifies the real
and forecloses it.to philosophize means to decide on a strat­egy of positing the world. it is not to know, but a priori, to
form decisional speech acts in an action of culture. always
(re)uttered in a diversity of writing styles and following the
example of myth and its primordial metaphors, philosophy­
form expresses the self-repetition and inertia of its auto-re­production. nietzsche shows quite well that philosophy, so
as to think itself, is brought to thematizing the absolute and
primordial metaphor of the eternal return of the same. phi­losophy-form is then a metaphorical discourse (propped up
by logos, being, etc. and fundamentally by the primordial
greek sacred). in general and non-nietzschean terms, the
philosopher is ultimately a priest conveying to the occident
the greek sacred overdetermined by the judeo-christian sa­cred.
through its main procedure-the transcending, insofar
as it has prevalence over the transcendent-it is a faith, with
the sufficiency of faith, destined by right to remain empty
but which necessarily avoids this emptiness by its repopula­tion with foreign objects and goals provided by experience,
culture, history, language, etc. through its style of commu­nication and of "knowledge," it is a rumor-the occidental
rumor-that is transmitted by hearsay, mimicry, specularity
and repetition.through its internal structure, or "philosoph­ical decision," it is the articulation of a dyad of contrasted
terms and of a divided unity, which is immanent and tran­scendent to the dyad; or still, the articulation of a universal
market, where concepts are exchanged according to each
system's own specific rules, and of an instance with two
faces: that of the philosophical division of labor and that of
the appropriation of a share of what the market of concepts
produces. philosophy is thus the capital or a quasi-capital in
the order of thought, or better yet the world's form under­stood in its most enveloping sense.
the preceding descriptions of philosophy find their
occasion in philosophical descriptions, but in reality they
already suppose non-philosophical terrain. if the pre­dicament involves saying that philosophy is the crite­
rion of the philosopher, the transformation of this aporia
into a problem and its solution are the criterion of the
non-philosopher who, regarding philosophy, i.e. its iden­tity, substitutes knowledge for the sufficiency of faith. this
is done by using means radically unknown to philoso­phy (vision-in-one as "real presupposed") or foreign to it
(the cloning and the determination-in-the-last-instance of
force (of) thought; the reduction of philosophy to the state
of symptom and occasion). non-philosophy breaks with the
auto/hetero-critiques of philosophy typical of modernity
and post-modernity. in its own way non-philosophy valoriz­es philosophy by freeing it from its authority over itself and
by releasing its identity or its sense for force (of) thought,
which is the authentic subject of (for) philosophy. it even
gives philosophy an expanded relevance through which it
appears as the span or the dimension of the world, i.e. as
the identity (of) its greek cosmopolitical determination; as
worl*d-thought, which vision-in-one alone can take as an ob­ject.

#non-autopositional presentation
immanent strncture of reference of non-philosophical state­
ments. this is a simple clone or reflection-without-reflected, a
theoretical givenness effectuated by and as force (oj) thought.

the metaphysics of representation or of autopositional rep­
resentation, as the world's first presence, was establ ished in
the 1 7th century. regardless of doctrinal differences, it can be
found in every classical author and continues to predominate
in the scientific psychology of perception. for classical authors,
consciousness is a doubling of presence which, despite the sub­
jective closure and embedding, secretly reproduces within inte­
rior representation an exterior of th ings, a represented that has
primacy over their representation. husserl and phenomenology
wanted to constitute th is first and presupposed relation to the
world. but the difficult and in extremis passage into the lifeworld
(lebenswelt) merely signals the difficulty inherent to autoposi­
tional representation.the constituting representation only winds
up re-positing this relation to the world by positing the real in
thought.thus it does nothi ng but posit what was presupposed by
classical authors. the theoreticians of deconstruction no doubt
limit and displace representation by differe(a) nce. h owever; this
critique is sti ll caught in the critiqued from whence it origi nates:
and the d isplacement of representation is nothing less than its
adequate emplacement by the real. in short, representation is
the element of specularity (of double reflection or divided reflec­
tion) , of speculation and ultimately of speculative thought.
the circle or the triad of representation (represented, repre­
sentative and mixture of representation) in turn only serves
as material in the elaboration of the concept of non-autopo­
sitional presentation. from this point of view, an exercise of
representation's dualysis would give this. the real would
have to be the representative, force (of) thought the (tran­
scendent) representation, and the world the represented, but
everything changes around "presentation:' the repetition or
redoubling included in re-presentation can do nothing but
disappear on behalf of a simple presentation, force (of) non­
autorepresentational presentation. the real is instead the
presented, but presented-without-presentation. it is named
with the occasion or aid of presentation as the radical past
of presentation, as the presented that has never been the ob­
ject of a presentation.as for the world-the simple but now
"pregnant" presenting of the whole philosophical triad-it is
also presented, but through and by force (of) presentation,
thus presented-by-presentation that is non-representational
(of) self-this would be the noema or the sense in which the
world is given. representation is the world's concept, an auto­
positional concept but here given to vision-in-one, i.e. to the
presented-without-presentation, as the presented's noema or
identity (by presentation). it would still have to combine and
reformulate this thematics with that of the mirror, of reflec­
tion and of specularity, but also on condition of its dualysis.
non-philosophy, as force (of) thought, dismantles the fe­
tishism of representation-thought, of its critical or modern,
differentialist or postmodern avatars. in reality, the full usage
of representation is philosophy itself insofar as it is auto­
position or auto-givenness or auto-representation in person.
all philosophical critiques of representation are not exten­
sive enough; they are given a restrained concept of it and
remain caught in the real illusion of philosophical decision
as sufficient.

#primacy
the one-in-one 's character of being inalienable, or the real 's
character of being foreclosed to all thought but able to deter­
mine it. primacy understood as determination-in-the-last­
instance dismantles the philosophical mixture-proper to prin­
ciplefr-ofprimacy and priority, their power-for-domination or
ontological primacy. primacy-without-priority precisely deter­
mines thought (as force (of) thought) to be first in relation to
philosophical material.

ontology and metaphysics attribute a mixture of primacy and
priority, of power and originarity, to "first causes" and "fi rst prin­
ciples" (heidegger included: the ontico-ontological primacy of
dasein). primacy does not abide without being fi rst, nor does
priority without participating in the primacy of principles. this is
the manifestation of the philosophical circle and the hierarchy at
the core of metaphysics itself th is trait subsists in any philoso­
phy whatsoever insofar as it is structured as a metaphysics and
insofar as it conceals a secret politics in this structure. the de­
hegel ianized dialectic of mao and then of althusser has exploited
this logic of preem inence and of domination in the theory of
contradiction as practice's "structure in dominance" and preemi­
nence over theory, of the dialectic's preem inence over material­
ism (or the other way around).
the radicalization of the one-in-one, posited as thought's
non-ontological terrain, subtracts it from the transcendental
characters of being, in particular from the spirit of hierar­
chical domination and from the priority of principles, from
their commandment and their commencement. the real
cannot be first, lest it be submitted to an order more pow­
erful than it. it is subtracted from this order for reasons of
radical being-separated and being-foreclosed, rather than for
reasons of super-ontology or super-essential domination sur­
passing being itself. thus simultaneously de-politicized and
de-ontologized, the real can still be said to hold a primacy­
without-domination insofar as it determines-but precisely
in-the-last-instance alone-not an object but another cause
called "occasionale."the "real presupposed" is thus deprived
of any ontological power and eliminates philosophy's
specific desire-for-hierarchy. on the other hand, since it is
foreign to any philosophical politics, this being-foreclosed is
capable of determining thought: no longer by a mastery that
uses a form or an information, but by a cloning or transmis­
sion of radical identity to a material prepared to receive it
and in turn divested of its original will to domination. the
specific primacy of the "last-instance" thus unleashes-as
"unilateral duality" -the real kernel of contradiction as
structure in preeminence. it frees a radical democracy or a
non-politics which transforms the world-politics that phi­
losophy is by submitting it to a "minimally" and strictly hu­
man pragmatics-somewhat without principles or "an-ar­
chic" -but without remaining content with deconstructing
the supposed pertinent power of philosophy.

#priority-without-primacy
force (of) thought 's character of being actually and performa­
tively first "radical commencement. " transcendentally first in
relation to the philosophical material, specifically as aligned
with the primacy of the one-real and itselfdeprived of any phil­
osophical type ofprimacy (mastery or domination).

combined with primacy, priority is characteristic of the "first"
principles and cause of metaphysics. " first philosophy" is fi rst
sometimes by its objects themselves (aristotle) , sometimes by
the order that it establ ishes in knowledge (descartes) and some­
times by the mode of its objects' apparent givenness (husserl),
but this priority is also the mark of ontological dignity. "onti­
co-ontological primacy" cou ld also under certain conditions be
called "ontico-ontological priority." this ideal culminates with
descartes and above all with husserl in the requirement of a
"radical commencement.' ' but the divided or mixed structure of
priority-primacy ensures that philosoph ical priority is neverthe­
less neither priority nor commencement. hence a delay set in
transcendental commencement, a powerlessness in the origin's
radical ity; and whence also the phi losophies that attempt to reg­
ister this fai lure as positive and that "commence" through differ­
ence, m i l ieu, becoming-as-origin (nietzsche, deleuze) or through
differance, delay and substitution (derrida) .

if " thought" -as fetishized philosophical object-cannot
be first without also being second and delayed, at least
differed/deferred, if "radical commencement" is a myth or a
constitutive philosophical fantasy, the "force (of) thought"
cloned by vision-in-one on the basis of philosophical mate­
rial is necessarily undivided in its essence and therefore rad­
ically first (but without-primacy). commencement is noth­
ing but commencement-and thus radical-if it is that of a
performational thought which is not divided even when it
makes use of division or distance . force (of) thought does
not involve belatedness, delay, differe(a)nce or supplement
at the origin, because nothing separates or divides it from
its "real presupposed," the one, whose primacy it is aligned
with but which is not itself first or "anterior" to thought or
proto-originary in some way. force (of) thought-or the
stranger-are brought "before" philosophy and are turned
toward it. radical commencement is the same thing as force
(of) thought's powerlessness to turn back toward its " origin"
or toward the real, since by definition it is turned toward
worl*d-thought. every post-modern philosophy, and its style
of gap, of difference, just like every modern philosophy and
its fantasy of the identity-of-the-origin, is invalidated when
radical identity stops being origin and becomes cause-of­
the-last-instance.

#radical immanence
in its really radicalform, i.e. immanent (to) self, or in any sort
of hypothesis of thought whatsoever, it is equivalent with the
one-in-one and consequently implicates vision-in-one as uni­
versal, but foreclose�to thought and/or the world-the real
as given-without-givenness and separated-without-separation .

the immanence/transcendence couple is one of philosophy's
fundamental operators. this dyad reciprocal ly relativizes its
terms, which is why the philosophies that lay claim to imma­
nence (spinoza, nietzsche, deleuze on the one hand, m. henry
on the other hand and i n a completely different mode)are mere­
ly claiming it halfway (in approximation with an inequal ity) and
are to the same extent thoughts that "divide" transcendence. i n
a philosophical dyad, the opposed terms are convertible with
1 24

their approximate oppositi on: immanence partici pates i n the
transcendence that it presupposes either as element in which it
is surreptitiously inscribed, or as mode of access, or as effect that
revolves around it and whose sense, as its condition, it constitutes
or develops. all the procedures of reduction of transcendence
to immanence remain phi losophical operations of division and
in the end are reversible, such that immanence is not a "real
presupposed," i.e. given-before-any-presupposition or supposed­
without-position, i.e. without-transcendence.
non-philosophy resumes the notion of radical immanence
elaborated by m. henry, but on condition of submitting it
pragmatically and theoretically to vision-in-one. it is not a
thought of immanence-yet another philosophical decision
that would objectify the latter, that would posit supposed
radical immanence by means of transcendence, which is
generally the case. a thought is itself effectively immanent
and not an autonegation of philosophy when it operates ac­
cording-to-immanence or proceeds by cloning philosophy
and the world. radical immanence itself stops being just an­
other slogan in the philosophical tradition (the slogan as
the other face of destiny, dispatch or calling) when it is no
longer posited by philosophical or constitutive operations
but by solely axiomatic operations, when it forms the object
of axiomatic (transcendental) decisions instead of theses. it
was fundamental for non-philosophy's specificity and for its
distinction from the philosophies of immanence to simulta­
neously elaborate the axioms of radical immanence and the
axiomatic style (here transcendental and determined-in-the­
last-instance) of thought.

#real
instance defined by its radical immanence under all possible
conditions of thought; thus by its being given (o.fj self, other­
wise called vision-in-one or one-in-one, and by its being-fore­
closed to thought. the real is neither capable of being known
or even "thought " but can be described in axioms. instead, it
determines-in-the-last-instance thought as non-ph ilosophical.

1 25

there is no notion vaguer and more "ideological," but also more
"modern," than that of the "real," if not that of "thought." by
definition every philosopher wants to "think the real," even the
most diehard ideal ist. its indetermination and its overdeterm i­
nation nevertheless find certain (generative and critical) limits
in parmenides' initial equation: "the same is being and th inking,"
as wel l as in its "etymological" origins (res) that determine the
field of its possible variations. these variations are as diverse as
philosophical decisions, but each one requires both the primacy
and priority of the real (substance and its treatments, being, spi rit,
will to power; faith, sense, moral law, etc.) in relation to which
the other instances of philosophical decision are distributed and
hierarchized. that the real lays claim to a primacy-and-priority
impl ies that it be inscribed in the element of transcendence and
exteriority (immanence being one of its secondary properties,
even in the so-cal led "philosophies of immanence": spinoza, ni­
etzsche, deleuze), and that it be reciprocal ly determined-ap­
proximate with an operation, a negation, a difference, etc.-with
thought.the philosophical real is at best repressed because it is a
desired real, cloven by transcendence.the philosophy of the 20th
century in the opening of the "judaic turn" has innovated by ceas­
ing to identify with the same and/or being so as to identify with
the other*. it has contributed to the dislocation of philosophical
decision without suspending its authority.
non-philosophy resorts to the "real" as non-conceptual first
term in virtue of its usage of philosophy as its " occasionale
cause." it conserves philosophy's primacy without priority,
and thus a non-metaphysical primacy over thought, i.e. the
primacy of a determination in-the-last-instance-alone that re­
spects the relative autonomy of thought, which on the other
hand can be called "first" or transcendental. non-philosophy
is nothing but a first thought because it lacks its own effect
on the real, which is henceforth called radical immanence
or identity through and through. no ontic or ontological
content, not even that of feeling, affectivity or life, can serve
to define the one's essence, lest it introduce a hidden tran­
scendence into it. even "immanence " merely serves to name
the real which tolerates nothing but axiomatic descriptions
or formulations. its function does not exceed that of first
term having a pre-eminence over other terms. it cannot
be a question of a simple formal symbol, precisely because
1 26

axiomatics is, if not in the real, at least in-real or according­
to-the-real and thus operates only in a transcendental mode.
non-philosophy interrupts for itself the philosophical
trajectory of the real, identified with various instances dur­
ing the course of its history (being, ousia, being, one, sub­
stance, concept, multiplicity, etc . , and ultimately the other*
in various modes).this is a particular interruption that does
not consist in radicalizing its transcendence in an exacerbat­
ed neo-platonic lineage or in a lacanian lineage (as impos­
sible of the symbolic, hole of the signifier, etc.)-lest it claim
to exceed philosophy by one last philosophical means-but
consists in radicalizing the bit of immanence that the tradi­
tion has accorded to the real, going so far as no longer even
claiming to " detach" it once and for all from philosophical
thought or so far as to axiomatize it as being-foreclosed
to the latter. one-in-one rather than merely outside-being,
outside-representation, outside-possibility, it allows for the
transformation of philosophical (marx) and psychoanalytic
(lacan) discourse on the real into a particularly "indicative"
and fruitful symptom of an emergent experience of thought,
i.e. emergent beyond philosophical possibilities .

#rea*l essence
instance of radical phenomena in opposition to philosophy 's
own order or occasion. one �peaks of "real " essence in this way,
for essence in general must be aligned with the real and deter­
mined by it insofar as essence in general is a characterization
operated by thought, lest it reintroduce a metaphysical inter­
pretation.

in the history of philosophical ideas, essence serves as an ideal
and stable reference against the mobility of becoming. accord i ng
to heidegger; this reference is nourished by the metaphysical dif­
ference codified by the scholastics between essentia (quidditas)
and existentia (quodditas). authentic difference for heidegger ig­
nores ideal reference as essentia. it indicates another essence
(wesen) of thought, less positive and less affected by in-essence.

1 27

" essence" is an ambiguous conceptual operator in non-phi­
losophy and has not always been rigorously utilized. "real
essence" alone enjoys a precise usage: here it is not transcen­
dental possibility but the real as determination-in-the-last­
instance. non-philosophy globally substitutes a thought (of
the) real or of the last instance for a metaphysical thought
of essence and the couplings of essences. the invalidation
of the mixture of the real and of language aligns thought
with the real rather than with the essences and subordi­
nates the latter instead as technical operators. an axiomat­
ization and a dualyzation of essence and existence are pos­
sible. for example, on the basis of essence as metaphysical
entity, essence as a priori, essence as real or transcendental,
essence as form, as sense, etc. hence the variable games to
be interpreted according to the context: essence (of the)
real or of the one, essence (of) real of the transcendental,
the real as that which "precedes" essence . . . and existence,
etc . non-philosophy's plasticity and style require both an
ongoing labor of internal interpretation and that of taste or
affect, i.e. the sensibility of solitary terms.

#reflection
status of thought's clone according to the one, determined in
accordance with the philosophical schema of specularity and
speculation. a nother way of understanding the clon ing of
thought by vision-in-one on the basis ofphilosophy.

to the extent that phi losophy-taken in its most invariant and
most general structure of dyad and decision-is an operation of
division and redoubl ing, it integrates a specular mirror moment
that makes of each term the double or image, in approximation
with some difference, of another term or of itself. phi losophy is
therefore aware of reflection, but in turn reflection is necessari ly
d ivided into two reflections that divide representation, since the
latter on the one hand is reflection of the real and on the other
reflection of itself. reflection is thus divided by the dual ity of the
thing and of the thing's representation-as-mirror; the m irror is
then the common and mediating form of thing and representa­
tion and relates the latter to the former; because the mirror itself
1 28

(for example, the ego) participates in both or is th ing and repre­
sentation. materialism (with lenin and the concept of knowledge
as "reflection without mirror") simplified this problematics and
began to denounce the idealist mass formation of metaphysical
doubles of the real. on the one hand, it autonomizes the process
of knowledge, which no doubt is referred to the real or is its "re­
flection," but without being its reflection in the sense of a mirror
image since it is without consistency and does not split into such
a phantasm, chimera or mirage. on the other hand, it affirms the
character-relative to the real-of this process of knowledge by
narrowly subordinating the latter to the former and thus by pro­
hibiting all idealism, i.e. the speculative autoposition of knowledge
as being the real itself. another critique, that of transcendental
idealism against transcendental real ism, wi l l denounce in the lat­
ter the presence of a m irror (fichte and husserl against spinoza
and descartes) .
the materialist solution poses the problem of knowledge in a
simpler and more exact way than idealism, but without realizing
that the latter defines every philosophy-including material ism­
and not simply theories of knowledge (althusser) .this is because
materialism sti ll poses it in the element of transcendence-that
of matter or "being" in relation to "consciousness"-whereas it
is stil l obl iged to conceive transcendence via the model of the
reflection of a thing (the objectivity of matter). such a reflection
implies, given the transcendence of matter, the dissimulated ex­
istence of a m irror, such as in idealist philosophy, but materialism
can only simplify this structure in the sense of identity or im­
manence of matter's "in-itself" which determines consciousness
without being determined by it in return (primacy of material ist
theory over the gnoseological thesis) . it thus arbitrates the prob­
lem by recognizing the existence of reflection but by denying that
of the mirror.
non-philosophy takes its departure in the identity or imma­
nence-unbound from any objectivity or transcendence­
of the one-real rather than that of "matter." the simplifica­
tion of philosophical structure is more radical than matter
but precisely less resolved. on the one hand, the in-objec­
tive immanence of the real excludes that it can be given as
a thing in a mirror, that it can be alienated into an image that
would be its representation, i.e. its auto-representation. the
one is therefore not bilaterally reflected, not because it does
1 29

not "exist," but because it is itself foreclosed to the possibil­
ity of being: if there is a reflection and mirror by the world, it
will be a reflection without the positive cooperation of the
reflected. furthermore, transcendence and its modes (indi­
cated and presented by philosophy in particular), if they are
given to the one, are from the latter's point of view given
and lived in-one. but, from their point of view, that of their
relative autonomy, they function as a mirror. they undoubt­
edly do not have at their disposal a thing that would be giv­
en to be reflected but, unlike the intra-philosophical mirror,
they enjoy a relative autonomy and are seen to extract a re­
flection according to the one that they convey or support:
their clone. the one is not reflected by itself, does not pro­
duce reflection, is not its own mirror; but there is a mirror
that lays claim to the one from its authority alone. the real
is the necessary and "negative" condition of the reflection
or clone that it decants in a certain sense. this reflection,
which supposes the relative autonomy of transcendence (of
"being"), is the transcendental and then the a priori as spe­
cific orders without their own autonomy, caught between
the real cause of this forced reflection and the world which
effectuates it. these orders therefore articulate the given­
without-givenness and the given-by-givenness. together
they constitute the transcendental and a priori syntax of
the subject or force (of) thought.
transferred in this way onto the terrain of radical imma­
nence that dualyzes it, the specular and speculative struc­
ture which obviously has the form of a triad (things to be
reflected, mirror, image or reflection) is not dismembered:
it always involves three terms but disposed in other ways.
except through anti-metaphysical abstraction, one cannot
speak of a reflection without mirror in the sense of an ab­
solute absence of mirrors. but it is thoroughly transformed
by the real's being-separated or foreclosed-by its imma­
nence-and gives rise to a new syntax which characterizes
it due to the very fact that the real is not divided and is not
itself given to be reflected or to reflect itself by virtue of its
non-autopositional simplification. the clone is the identity
of the speculative structure that reflection according to the
real is. in effect, the speculative structure in and of philoso­
phy is itself divided in each of its three instances, whereas
the conditions of vision-in-one, without suppressing the
1 30

reflected (for the world, not for the one), the mirror and the
reflection, in some sense extract their simplicity or identity.
these conditions suffice to detach the speculative triad from
its own autoreflection and from the philosophical circle in
general. it is now formed by three terms that are identities:
the first is real identity, never divided (the one); the second
is an identity that is certainly divided but one that can no
longer spread its division (the world); the third is the tran­
scendental order of reflection which is reflection according
to the real, but undivided non-autopositional reflection and
never that of double reflection. these three instances no
longer form a system in the sense that philosophical deci­
sion is. strictly speaking, it will not be said that non-philoso­
phy is " antispeculative" -it is never the negation or reversal
of philosophy-but that it is non-speculative, which means
that it is the identity (of) philosophical speculation and the
identity (of) philosophy in general.

#relative autonomy
irreducibility of the transcendent orders of reality to the real or
irreducibility of transcendence in general to the immanence qf
the one-in-one as radical autonomy. it justifies their function
as occasionale cause or as material for all theory determined
in-the-last-instance by the real and justifies the existence of a
theory itself.

it is in marxism rather than in a philosophy of substance and ac­
cidents that the concepts of relative and absolute autonomy take
on a precise and theoretically determined sense; consequently
these concepts take on this sense within the framework of an
ontological dualism of infrastructure-which defines the real par
excel lence-and superstructure-which conjugates a type of re­
ality and of specific or autonomous organization with a causal
dependence in relation to the infrastructure. these concepts
connect a distinction of regions of reality with a distinction of
types of causal ity in the original but poorly elucidated concept of
"determination in the last instance."
if the one-real is defined by a radical immanence
that does not bring anything empirical, ontic or even

131

ontological with it, neither object nor objectification, if it
does not itself fall under any objectifying or even surrepti­
tiously intuitive act, then necessarily nothing can be con­
cluded from it concerning the existence or non-existence,
the reality or inconsistency of the sphere of transcendence.
if it wants to be thematized, a thought according to the one
thus supposes transcendence to be given-and supposes
itself to be given along with it.and it must elaborate its mode
of being-given from an absolute contingency-there is tran­
scendence rather than simply immanence. this thought
therefore renounces any "why? " (why transcendence in­
stead of nothing?), any hypothesis on this type of reality, and
it is only concerned with the latter insofar as it can be given
in turn-even though it be transcendence-under the con­
ditions of radical immanence or of the phenomenon. but if
it analyzes all its conditions, it must also integrate this rela­
tive autonomy-which in part explains its own-into the
total operation of thought that cannot be deduced, if not
by idealism, from the one-real alone. it is prevented from
claiming to completely dissolve, concerning the one alone,
the antinomies and amphibologies by which transcendence
is fabricated in philosophy's form in particular. this relative
autonomy explains that there is a causality of the real on
transcendence-a causality fully supposed by the exercise
of thought-that it takes on the form of determination-in­
the-last-instance and that the latter is materialized in a third
but not synthetic instance, i.e. force (of) thought as identity
of the real (and) of thought, identity of the one (and) of
being.
to use another formulation, the one-real itself is defined
by an indifference or an autonomy of being-foreclosed (im­
manent uni-laterality) without necessary relation to the em­
pirical, even that of immediate negation. but it has an effect
of unilaterality that is unilaterality-of: this is a transcendental
property and is said of a necessary "empirical" given as occa­
sionale cause or material.as a priori and in-the-last-instance
organon, real by its essence, it must be admitted that force
(of) thought conserves from its occasionale origins a ker­
nel of identification or of semi-reciprocity with philosophy
or with mixture-form, insofar as, without being essentially
determined by the latter, it needs a support or sup-poses
mixture-form without being in a relation of mixture with it.
1 32

this interminably reduced or suspended kernel (but trans­
formed and indestructible) is revealed as support-function.
it is obvious that its "transcendental" situation, which does
not make it the real but a "relation" identical with the real
in the real alone and thus without synthesis, compels the
force (of) thought to maintain a unilateral relation to the
empirical symmetrically, which is in some sense a relation
to reciprocity without reciprocity.the fact that it has "need"
of a support, which is the mixture itself reduced to this
function, means that it is identical with the support not in
the latter but in itself and by it alone, since it is therefore a
question of a unilateral transcendental identity. this kernel
of identification, which is not reciprocal with the mixture­
form or occasionale cause, could be called the "fantasy" of
force (of) thought. it represents the effective, if not real, con­
dition of non-philosophy.

#reversibility
syntax and operation of the dyad which forms the basis ofphil­
osophical decision; they are echoed on the superior or transcen­
dental level of the system. limit-tendency of all philosophy to
which the apparently least fluid syntaxes can be reduced (reci­
procity, convertibility, exchange, contract, etc.). tbe unilateral
duality of cloning (whose principle is vision-in-one), which
should instead be characterized as "uni-tax, " is opposed to re­
versibility. furthermore, determination-in-the-last-instance is
opposed to reciprocal determination.

as duality and synthesis of a "syntax" and a "semantics" ( experi­
ence of the real), philosophy defines a specific "form of order"
that it interprets with the scientific forms of order with which
it mixes-this is "philosophical rationality." the essence of phi lo­
sophical syntax is precisely that of being a syn-taxis (a synthetic
order par excellence, encompassing analysis in this very sense) .
this is reversibility, ful ly realized only in certain cases of absolute
idealism (hegel-above all nietzsche) , but which is a tendential
limit of all phi losophy as such once it is rel ieved of its procedures
that are taken from the sciences with which philosophy combines
it (convertibil ity, dialectics, difference, reciprocal determination,

1 33

relation-without-relation or semi-reversibil ity, etc.). reversibility
is the mixture of a formal relation of equivalence and of the
intuitive given of spatiality which is the element of philosophical
topology. it is in the principle of phi losophy itself insofar as the
latter commences with a dyad, a coupling of terms or a line of
demarcation-particularly in the principle of the order of the
phenomenon in plato, of the essence of matter in aristotle, of
the cosmological dialectical i l l usion in kant-and forces every
philosopher to throw the irreversible back into semblance or to
reabsorb it in circularity.
i n psychoanalysis, reversibility is a fundamental dimension of
the topological approach to the other* and assures its footing
on the one: instead of determination by the one in-the-last­
instance, there is a reciprocal determination of the one by the
other*; and consequently the impossibil ity of thinking unilaterality
and time.this reversibilizing coupling of the one and the other*
is the analogon of that of the one and being in philosophy and
demonstrates that at best psychoanalysis is structured as a phi­
losophy.
non-philosophy treats this syntax as a simple material. from
the start, it prohibits this syntax-at least for its own ac­
count, not in philosophy itself-from relating itself to itself
or from auto-positing itself. non-philosophy transforms it
into a simple symptom of the constitutive transcendental
identity of force (of) thought, while it also manifests its
sense (of) identity as the foreclosure of unilateral duality.
stated otherwise, it determines it in-the-last-instance. car­
ried out on the basis of philosophical indications, the pre­
ceding descriptions already suppose vision-in-one's point
of view.

#rule (of force (of) thought)
immanent syntax or form of the usage of material-language
(ph ilosophy). non-philosophy 's rules constitute an a priori prag­
matics of the unilateral acting offorce (oj) thought.

the concept of ru le was subtracted from its purely (methodo-)
logical usage (descartes, durkheim) by kant who defines the
understanding as the facu lty of ru les. due to this definition, the
1 34

rule is constitutive of the theoretical usage of reason; the latter;
however; is not reduced to the former. reason, the faculty of
principles, is even less constrained in its practical or teleological
uses. kant thus refuses the reduction of thought to regularity;
a refusal which for example also characterizes the reflection of
wittgenstein, who emphasizes the necessary hiatus between the
rule and its application and inscribes all regularity in the fabric of
a form of l ife.
vision-in-one or given-without-givenness is deprived of
rules, unlike the regulated usage in immanence-thus "non­
regulated" but not uncontrolled-of non-philosophical
pragmatics. since it is the immanent expression of force
(of) thought whose essence is determination-in-the-last-in­
stance, the rule naturally accompanies the procedure of the
reception and transformation of philosophical material. it
takes as many determined configurations-which are nei­
ther transcendent nor auto-positional-as this procedure
requires for its operations.the non-philosophical rule is nei­
ther rule of the rule nor exception to the rule, but a non
auto-positional rule (non auto-regulated).
thus under the (misleading) term of "reciprocal rede­
scription," the first rule of non-philosophy prescribes the
material's determination by the one and the one's refor­
mulation with the symptomatic aid of material. the second
rule hurls all of the material into the "general equivalent" of
the chora or of a generalized aesthetic. the third and fourth
rules characterize the cloning and "redescription" in materi­
al-language of the (transcendental and a priori) structures
that are valid for philosophical decision.the fifth rule quali­
fies the support-function fulfilled by the material itself dur­
ing the preceding operations. lastly, the sixth rule explains
the results of the procedure itself (rules 2 through 4) in the
form of a non-thetic universe, i.e. non-thetic clone or reflec­
tion.
concerning their usage, one can no longer speak of a
transcendent opposition between a material and a rule­
which confirms the immanentization of the latter-but of a
unilateral duality between the rule 's transcendental essence
and the given to be transformed. as for the rule, it is con­
tingent-and-necessary by its own occasionale material (the
philosophical concept of the rule and the a priori rules of
135

philosophy) and is determined-in-the-last-instance by the
real or vision-in-one. so what is broken is the supposed
immanent "systematic necessity" of a "body of rules," the
ultimate fetish from which pragmatics must free itself if it
wants to affect philosophical language itself.

#science-thought
a unified theory of thought is the first objective of non-philoso­
phy insofar as it is understood as first science. its field ofprop­
erties is philosophy-as-metascience (epistemology, philosophy of
the sciences, etc); its specific object is thought as identity-in­
the-last-instance of science and ofphilosophy. a theory alone,
rather than a new philosophy, thus introduces democracy into
thought itself.

philosophy spontaneously presents itself as a thought rather than
a theory, a thought distinct from knowledge or on the contrary
coordinated with it-as a thought of thought. its te/os is thus the
autoposition of thought as bei ng or as determ ining the real. it is
the only claimant to this privilege wh ich it ultimately exerts vis­
a-vis empirical materials by autoreflection or autoposition. if the
same is being and thinking, thought can simultaneously be a term
opposed to being and the superior synthetic form of their opposi­
tion. philosophical thought is the complement or the supplement,
but also the enveloping gathering, of al l experiences-including
science-and thus absol ute thought (ge-danke) . i n its structure,
philosophy is thought-without-knowledge that needs science's
knowledge-without-thought-it is a double structure of division
or lack.this division with itself and this setting-in-hierarchy of sci­
ence and philosophy is cal led un itary. specifically "un itary theory
of thought." the unitary motivations of certain sciences or even
the empiricist idea of a "unified encyclopedia of the sciences" in
a common logical language (vienna circle) are projections or
avatars of the unitary style. conversely, what philosophy fetishizes
by the term "thought" are always unstable mixtures of philosophy
and of science (idea, concept, act, reason, etc.).
by determining the mixtures of philosophy and science
as material and occasion, first science, non-philosophy's
initial realization, proposes not to separate a pure thought

1 36

from science or to elevate science to the state of a new
thought, but to produce the emergence of a new entity,
science-thought, which will have as its object-this is an­
other way of saying it-worl*d-thought or this mixture.
not in the form of their synthesis but in the form of their
identity-of-the-last-instance, it must guide a theory by which
science-thought is related to its mixed form as a science is
related to its object and identically as a philosophy is related
to its object. it therefore constitutes this mixture of world­
thought, of "thought" and of " knowledge," into a new " sci­
entific continent," scientific but transcendental and unified
for every saying according-to-the-real. it eliminates philoso­
phy's claim to hierarchical domination over science and to
the perpetual scientific revolution in "thought."
such a science-thought does not yet exist and has only
witnessed the attempts of marx and freud and, for exam­
ple, lacan. but worl*d-thought is the (non-philosophical)
symptom and occasion of science-thought. each time and
on each side, science and philosophy are inseparable in
their more or less constricted modes. when this insepara­
bility is simply that of a philosophical connection, science
is dispersed and reified into knowledges that are isolated
and commandeered for external ends, and philosophy is
dispersed and reified into antagonistic decisions. when it is
more constricted, more-than-connected or bound, science
and philosophy, both from the point of view of their objects
and of their specific procedures, fuse together in a com­
mon matrix, or more precisely in a matrix unified-in-the-last­
instance by the real: force (of) thought. non-philosophy's
objective is the emergence of this utopia, which cannot be
compared with a new alliance of science and philosophy
that would be somewhat on behalf of the former, somewhat
on behalf of the latter.

#science-of-men
science according to the one-qua-man that exposits the unifj;ing
effects of vision-in-one on the variety of the matrices (philosophi­
cal, anthropological, sociological, psychoanalytic, etc.) of man \
description. the science of men or of human multitudes must ex­
plicate the "sciences of man " in a unified theory of the stranger.

1 37

ph ilosophy-form regu lates the relations between man and the
city, man and the logos, man and the cosmos. this preoccupa­
tion of the ancients has been appropriated by the moderns and
above all by the post-moderns who are attached to man as be­
ing-in-the-world or being-in-the-city, etc. thus man's indifference
or being-foreclosed is the central phenomenon that is always
repressed. if treatises of human nature have existed, no treatise
of man as real identity has ever seen the l ight of day. the human
sciences have divided a territory which is not man-one's domain
but a territory parceled out into hal lucinated or supposed human
attributes (power; language, desire, politics, etc.).
vision-in-one is the real cause or essence in-the-last-in­
stance of the existing-stranger-subject. conversely, one can
symbolize or name the one by man or at least by the real
essence of man or real-ego (ego-in-ego). it is not man in gen­
eral who is submitted to the real (philosophy, psychoanaly­
sis), it is the subject, but in-the-last-instance, who is aligned
with man-as-one. the secret of the non-philosophical, non­
platonic one is the same as the secret of man as ego, which
is being-foreclosed to the world. man is the non-sufficient
radical, neither the absolute nor a deficiency of the abso­
lute. this is because man himself can determine, in a radi­
cal but not sufficient way, a transcendenta*l science of him,
but only as stranger-subject, not as immanent ego or given­
without-givenness. the only real and rigorous science is not
a theory of the one-ego but strictly a theory of the subject
as stranger. this thesis invalidates, if not philosophy and the
human sciences, at least their claims about supposed "man,"
their belief in "man," their anthropo-logical faith. since the
stranger-subject exists radically de jure and is not numeri­
cally multiple, non-philosophy gives rise, in accordance
with the material of the human sciences and anthropology,
to a "science of men" rather than to the "sciences of man" :
it exhibits the identity (of) anthropo-logical difference that
sustains them and gives it as "object" to the stranger-subject.

1 38

sense (sense (of) identity)
ensemble of knowledges that relate to the ph ilosophical mate­
rial because they are manifested byforce (of) thought and as its
"correlate. " non-philosophical sense is always sense (of) iden­
tity. tbe content of this identity ofphilosophy or of its structures
is that of being the real 's foreclosure-in-the-last-instance. phi­
losophy takes on the sense offoreclosure and of simple occa­
sion: this is its identity as "constituted " byforce (of) thought and
vision-in-one in-the-last-instance.

sense is the element of philosophy insofar as it is transcendence
within immanence (husserl) enveloping every given in a "halo of
generality" (merleau-ponty). it can be defined as irreducible ten­
sion, gap, distance, or as all the ways in which the ideal identity
of an object is given. analytically, sense is said of a sign or of a
proposition and is either reduced to another sign that interprets
the first (peirce) or to this proposition itself, i.e. to the set of
rules that govern its usage (wittgenstein). after he insisted upon
it in phenomenology's lineage, heidegger rejects this concept as
arising or seeming to arise too directly from a certain human
performativity in order to arrive at truth as aletheia.
if philosophical sense and phenomenological sense in par­

ticular is of the order of generality, non-philosophical sense
is uni-versal in-the-last-instance: it is an identity which is said
of or related to the philosophy-object but which is only re­
lated to the latter by the uni-versality in-the-last-instance of
vision-in-one. several immediate consequences follow from
this:
l . the philosophical doublet of sense (a halo-which is
itself"general" -of generality . . . ) is eliminated, and the non­
autopositional identity (of) sense consists in being the sense
(of) identity.

2 . sense is determined in philosophy by referential, situ­
ational, functional, interpersonal contexts. now it arises in
its essence from determination-in-the-last-instance alone: it
is thus identically theoretical or explicative and pragmatic
or pertinent to the usage of philosophy.

1 39

3 . it can be said that non-philosophical sense is deter­
mined by the structure of force (ot) thought as " subject,"
except that this structure does not form a set of rules but
a game of rules itself determined-in-the-last-instance by the
real. this is what suffices to distinguish non-philosophy
from wittgenstein's solution.
4. understood in this way, sense is one of non-philoso­
phy's first terms whose formulation and representation are
in turn elaborated by force (ot) thought on the basis of the
concepts of sense as simple material, particularly those of
sense in its various relations to the noema, to the signifier, to
the signified, to signification, to usage, etc. in other words,
the non-philosophical representation of sense can utilize
extremely diverse conceptual materials.
in accordance with the preceding points, this represen­
tation of the object "sense" no longer forms a circle with
it but is determined-in-the-last-instance by the sense of this
object "sense." as for these latter, the object "sense" and its
sense-the sense of sense-are identical in approximation
with the diversity of the philosophical material.

#solitude
pure affect, without affection, of the human in man, of his "sep­
arated" essence of radical immanence, of his identity (to) self
that is independent of the world orforeclosed to worl*d-thought.
along with veracity, solitude is also that by which the one-in­
one determines (in-the-last-instance) its objects and their non­
philosophical descriptions.

i n general, solitude takes on an anthropological value: means of
moral askesis, instrument of introspection (montaigne, rousseau,
amiel, pessoa) for an intimate self-knowledge. it becomes a spe­
cifical ly philosophical problem with the cartesian position of the
cogito menaced by metaphysical solitude or solipsism. from then
on, even when husserl defines a transcendental sol itude of the
ego, it is a question of reducing solipsism by intersubjectivity and
of showing that it is merely a necessary appearance or stage.
the philosophers' fear facing human sol itude is emphasized in
1 40

heidegger even further: boredom, anxiety, care, being-toward­
death, by elevating dasein to authenticity, promote a non-human,
if not superhuman solitude, give it a status of effect or attribute
and refuse it that of strictly real and simply human essence.
from the start, solitude can be understood in a simple way
as identity of immanence (to) self. it then positively radi­
calizes, as being-foreclosed, the idea of an intrinsic finitude
of the human in man, more precisely of the human-of-the­
last-instance in the existing-stranger-subject. it implies that
man never coincides with the world, not even "with" him­
self in distance-contrary to philosophy's thesis which
then makes of solitude a naturally unthinkable numerical
concept. prohibiting the auto-position of the ego and of the
stranger-subject which it determines, solitude definitively
signifies that man is deprived of all substance (res) and of all
ideal essence qua mode of such a substance . the ego's real
kernel, its being-separated-without-separation, is solitude,
which "precedes" the existence that the stranger-subject is
and precedes the philosophical type of essence to a great­
er extent. it implies the abandonment of all metaphysical
anthropology along with all humanism. man-in the dual­
ity of the ego, positively left alone by oneself, and of the
subject turned as stranger toward the world-is not even
a transcendental robinson crusoe and does not arise from
number and quantity, since solitude explicitly protects him
from them.
a more differentiated axiomatic elaboration distinguish­
es between the ego as alone (the one without attribute,
even that of solitude) and solitude properly speaking as
non-worldly or non-philosophical position of the alone as
stranger-subject, in the same way that given-without-given­
ness is distinguished from givenness. another possible dis­
tinction is still that between the alone and solitude, the lat­
ter this time as the effect of unilateralization by which the
alone (i. e . vision-in-one) affects all thought. solitude then
receives an ethical type of function in parallel with that of
veracity, which expresses in the non-ethical order the uni­
identity by which the alone affects its objects and their de­
scriptions. it is each time a problem of axiomatic usage, of
rigorous pragmatics rather than a problem of conceptual
systematicity.

#stranger
other* first name of man (qua) subject: 1) existing beyond his
nucleus of real immanence; 2) in occasionale relation with the
world; 3) not as opposed to an other orfacing an other* person,
but as radical form or clone of the other* person himself.

with the exception of plato-who makes of the stranger; in
relation to being and non-being, to the one and the multiple,
the source and spokesperson of the highest doctrines-the
stranger is one of the greatest unknowns of philosophy, which
has sometimes substituted it for the l inguistico-cultural problem
of "foreigners," received from the social and political sciences,
sometimes and more frequently for the problem of the "other*
person" that it believed to be able to regulate in the best case
(fichte, husserl) by the problem of lntersubjectivity as simple
reworking of the alter ego's old specular topos. levinas alone,
at the judaic limits of phi losophy, has broached a reflection on
the conditions of man as stranger; but always withi n the context
of the equation: man = other* man as absolute inversion of the
modern philosophical equation: man = self, and other* = other
self in every scenario and in their socio-pol itical gradations, the
stranger is always other* than self to various degrees, is face to
face with self, and consequently lacks identity and is the bearer of
danger and aggressiveness. philosophy has never acceded to the
idea that the self, the man that i am, could be the stranger him­
self. the stubborn search for exception and unicity (in the name
of the subject) has made it lack the stranger's identity.
via the reworked and successive concepts of the individual,
of minorities and of unary multiplicities, non-philosophy
has finally found in the stranger its strategically most ad­
equate concept of man, more precisely of the subject as
existing beyond the real immanence that it moreover is in
its ultimate cause. determined-in-the-last-instance by the
real or radically immanent ego, the subject exists in certain
transcendental and aprioristic functions produced by the
real ego cloning them on the basis of the occasion that the
world is. but if by definition these functions make it other*­
of-the-world, its rea*l essence makes it other*-than-the-world
or stranger.

142

thus, the self (the real ego) and the stranger stop being
opposed, stop being face to face and at war. they are iden­
tical-in-the-last-instance. the stranger does not lack identity,
which it possesses in-the-last-instance; and the self is no lon­
ger encroached upon and divided by the other* (self), but
the self can be, it and it alone, the stranger. there are only
egos without strangers, for which they have no need, or
only strangers unopposed to egos, nothing but a democratic
society of strangers who are a self-in-the-last-instance, each
and every one. democracy is in this way first of all given
under thought's real conditions, not in the world where by
definition it can be nothing but an objective appearance;
and then, in the interval between the former and the latter,
democracy is given in the form of these existing-stranger­
subjects who form a transcendental city that is not of this
world without thereby being abstract, since they would be
cloned from this world or the philosophical city. democ­
racy is the excess of the explication over what it must expli­
cate: the default universal war of uni-versality, i.e. of identity.

#thought
uni-versalized concept, identically valid for philosophical
thought and scientific knowledge. jn this sense, thought is what
is determined-in-the-last-instance or clonedfrom these two dis­
ciplines.

the relations between thought and the real are given by the
parmenidean matrix "the same is being and thinking." thought
and being are in a relation of reciprocal infl uence. their iden­
tity can thus take several forms: from the supposed adequate
correspondence of perception and object up to the identity of
self-consciousness and consciousness of the object; of subjective
"reflection" and objective reflection, dialectical identity of the real
and the rational, but always by respecting this cor-respondence.
broken in the form of a ( cor-) respondence of a hearkening-re­
sponse to being (heidegger), or of a difference, of a thought­
with-the-trace (derrida) , this adequation subsists as one of the
major presuppositions-one of the halves-of deconstructions
and one of the most obvious criteria of the phi losophical style.

1 43

first science introduces another "experience of thought" this is its object-in the form of a triple innovation. 1 . from
the point of view of its origin: it abandons the parmenidean
matrix and, rather than a posteriori, a priori breaks any
correspondence between thought and the real. instead of
thought being supposed to co-determine the real qua be­
ing, it is the real-but qua one-that determines thought
more than unilaterally or without reversibility (without re­
flection in any form whatsoever of the one in the other) by
foreclosure. this is the formula of their relations: "the one
and thought, or the one and being, are identical but in-the­
last-instance alone." thus thought can only hope to change
itself according to the one-real rather than change the real.
2 . from the point of view of its nature: first science distin­
guishes its cause and its specific operations; on the one hand,
vision-in-one, the immanent lived experience proper to the
one alone and which responds to a third type of experi­
ence, of"knowledge" or of manifestation that is neither con­
sciousness nor reflection, neither the unconscious nor any
kind of logico-natural procedure whatsoever, but that which
can only be called given-without-givenness or manifested­
without-manifestation, etc . ; on the other hand, its specific
mechanisms which are no longer philosophical (reflection,
dialectic, difference, etc.) or psychoanalytical (condensa­
tion, displacement, etc.) operations but the henceforth tran­
scendental operations of induction and deduction. 3. from
the point of view of its "subject" and its extension: a science­
thought in the fullest sense of the term is ultimately recog­
nized against the impoverishment of thought by which phi­
losophy would affect science and the impoverishment of
knowledge by which science would affect philosophy. real
thought in-the-last-instance by its cause; thinking by virtue
of its practical immanence, albeit deprived of any reflexivity
or consciousness; rigorous due to its noncircular operations,
albeit having effect on philosophy's natural language.

#time-without-temporality
said of the radical past, time 's immanence (to) self, its identity
through and through which neither exists nor has ever existed,
which is but negatively or without being. it determines-in-the­
last-instance a transcendental and subjective temporality that
it clones from the philosophical blending of time and temporal­
ity proper to being or the other*, i.e. cloned from the present as
world-time. tbis pure transcendental temporality constitutive
of the stranger-subject is the "mobile " clone of the world-present
under the condition of the "immobile " past: non-platonism.

it is useless to categorize the philosophies of time systematical ly.
their aporias (whether to think time or the unstable tempo­
ral ly or not) stem from the unitary opposition between metric,
chronological or ontic time and ontological time (or not: judaic
d iachronics). hence the doublet of a "temporal time" or " (self-)
temporalizing" time, of a temporal ized time and a temporalizing
time, which testifies to a failure of the identity (of) time con­
ceived as mixture.
temporality is most often an interpretation by philosophy of
the scientific theories of time (for example, physico-cosmological
time conceived as linearity and irreversibil ity, cf. the second prin­
ciple of thermodynamics). contemporary philosophy wants to
avoid this overly passive course and to reconnect temporal ity to
being or the other*: already in kant, time, as a priori form of sensi­
bility, enjoyed a privi lege in relation to space insofar as it is under­
stood i n a more originary way (cf. heidegger). heidegger radical­
izes exiting the husserlian circuit of objective or metric time by
opposing it, i n an almost bergsonian way, to subjective duration:
the originary l ived time said of intimate consciousness. through
the opposition he establ ishes between constituting time and con­
stituted time, husserl reveals time's originary autoconstitution in
its different modalities (retention, protention, presentation, rep­
resentation) . it is through these modal ities that the autoconstitu­
tion of the so-called "immanent" temporality of consciousness is
effectuated. heidegger displaces this problematics by radical izing
it with the three ekstases of time as the modes of dasein's tem­
porality. if temporality-as question-exists, it signifies the sense
of being as veiling and unveiling of dasein's ek-sistence, but qua
being's manifestation in its triple and single dimension.

145

unlike the philosophy of the 1 9th and 20th centuries, that
of nietzsche and heidegger after hegel, non-philosophy
abandons the attempt to make of time (of history or even of
becoming) the essence of the real, to desubstantialize the
latter by the former, to align being with time or time-being
with duration, etc.these operations are so diverse that they
repeat the philosophical gesture of the search for an origi­
nary and hierarchizing essence which is the "time of time,"
an originary temporality, even a transcendental or existential
temporalization, etc. recent philosophical decisions multi­
ply the forms of the doublet of time and temporality, widen
it, bring time back to the alterity of a diachrony, but still do
not find time's cause, nor the subject (ot) temporality, nor
the identity of this world-time that philosophical time is,
precisely because they temporally transcend toward time's
essence on the basis of the presupposition of the (empiri­
cal) time-of-the-world and only posit this essence of time as
sufficient or mixed essence.world-time on the contrary can
only be a material or occasion for naming, indicating and ef­
fectuating the vision-in-one (ot) time.this time-seen-in-one
can only be from its position the radical past of pure imma­
nence and of identity, a past which has not only never been
present but also will never be present in the future (and for
the future) as trace, but which will remain immanent past
even in the future that it clones from world-time's present.
it also cannot be a question of understanding time-ac­
cording-to-the-one via the onto-chronological model of be­
ing or that of its semi-specular image oudeo-philosophical:
the infinite other* whose structure maintains unitary auto­
position that is merely inhibited: temporality as memory or
even diachronic past). nor is it a question of connecting it
to a particular scientific theory (einsteinian space-time, for
example). it is instead a question of employing a theory and
pragmatics (ot) the essence of identically philosophical and
scientific time (in the cosmological sense, for example), but
as determined in-the-last-instance by the one-past.
hence, rather than dimensions or ekstases, the clones or
instances that form the theory of temporality. it will be ac­
knowledged that this implies new conceptions of the "past,"
the "present" and the "future," i.e. three symptoms of time-in­
one or according-to-the-one.

1 46

1 . time as given or past-without-temporalization, as seen-in­
one or " in-time," etc . -these first names of time symbolize
not a past time but a time of the past which simultaneously
possesses a primacy over both synchrony and diachrony
and determines these transcendent dimensions themselves,
at least insofar as they form the object of philosophical in­
terpretations. the radical past is uni-versa! immanent time,
of which one could say that it is-without-existing or even
that it is a non-temporal time. it is less a question of a mem­
ory capable of forgetting and of anamnesis than that of a
past which cannot be forgotten and which, precisely for
this reason, is foreclosed to memory itself, which in its suf­
ficiency believes to be able to forget it and repeat it by an­
amnesis. this one-time, even effectuated as future, remains
in its necessary sterility and in no way participates in the
world-present such as non-philosophy conceives it, and no
longer-this is what distinguishes it from the levinasian
other* and from the "trace" -participates in the ontological
present or in the "same."
2 . the mixture of time and of the world-this mixture's
identity or sense-elevates time to the world's form un­
der philosophy's authority: this is world-time, which is not
simply a regional time nor even the world's time, but the
philosophical experience of time insofar as it structures a
"world" whose sense in turn is to foreclose the one-time
of the past. in its non-philosophical sense, the "present" is
no longer a dimension or even an ekstasis of time, but the
ensemble of decisions-of-time already carried out or still to
come in accordance with the world. this is material-time,
the occasion-time from which non-philosophy decants its
language of time.
3. ultimately, the instance of the transcendental future
or of temporalizing force is deployed from the past-in-one
to the world-present. the future is identity cloned or pro­
duced on the basis of world-time as one . it belongs to the
future to be an effectuation of the uni-versa! past under con­
ditions of world-time. this effectuation signifies, by defini­
tion and in contradistinction to the past that does not exist,
that the future exists in the sense that it is transcendental
identity turned toward the present of world-time. instead of
1 47

having the three instances available within the element
that is ekstatic or universal-by-transcendence, which gener­
alizes the supposed linearity of time, non-philosophy pro­
duces the experience of a time of exteriority or stranger
time, existing-stranger for the present, addressed to rather
than thrown into world-time. the stranger-subject, with
which the transcendental future is conflated, "aims" at the
world in its identity, aims at it in a non-phenomenological
or non-intentional sense, without calling for fulfillment, sim­
ply sufficing for it to aim at it so as to guarantee its possible
relation to it completely. if the future is subject (ot) time or
temporalizing force (indicated, named, effectuated on the
basis of world-time's present), it is turned toward world­
time which it transforms or from which it is extracted by
the past's power. the future is the clone obtained by the
radically "immobile" past on the basis of the world's mobile
time. the existing-stranger-subject unleashes time from its
platonic as well as bergsonian and heideggerian images. it
brings about the manifestation of time's phenomenon, pre­
vented from applying the structure of a philosophical deci­
sion onto it, but instead proceeds to a theory and a pragmat­
ics of philosophical time on the basis of the past as radical
immanence (ot) time to self. this is heretical time or the
heretical conception of time, without history or becoming.

#transcendental
fi'rst instance, after the real or the one, constitutive of the sub­
ject as force (of) thought. it is the clone of the transcenden­
tal unity proper to philosophical decision and is produced
by vision-in-one on the basis of this symptomatic indication .
transcendental identity is no longer philosophy 's transcenden­
tal one associated with a division; it is an undivided identity
which finds nothing but its occasion in the latter.

the transcendental obviously has a long philosophical history
marked by aristotle, certain scholastics, kant (who is nothing
but an important turn for it), husserl, etc.; but underneath these
labels, there is the transcendental as invariant of the structure
of philosophical decision, as transcendental unity immanent
and transcendent to the basic dyad, consequently as divided
1 48

and claiming, due to its autoposition, to be real, to be the real .
in this very general sense, the transcendental is the superior
dimension of all philosophy. this is how non-philosophy under­
stands it, namely as that which forms a circle or doublet with the
empirical on the one hand through the a priori, and on the other
hand with the real through its auto-position.
in its philosophically overdetermined beginnings, non-phi­
losophy claimed to be radically transcendental, and then it
understood that its project-which ran the risk of passing
for a radicalization of husserl-required more than a sup­
plementary overcoming of the transcendental, which is in
every way first or commencement in the order of thought:
that its project required aligning non-philosophy with the
real's primacy as with a cause by immanence, not present
and positive but non-sufficient or negative. non-philosophy
is therefore displaced on four, and not three, orders: the real
or the one (foreclosed to the transcendental); the "empiri­
cal" given (or worl*d-thought); the transcendental (which the
real clones on the basis of the unity of experience); the a
priori (also cloned but on the basis oftranscendence which
is the organon of philosophy). the transcendental forms the
first instance of force (of) thought. now the latter is an undi­
vided identity, albeit cloned-thus also "separated" -on the
basis of divided transcendental unity; or it is given-without­
givenness in-the-last-instance on the basis of the givenness
of this most elevated philosophical unity. from the point of
view of its genesis and its function, it is related not to the a
priori but instead to the transcendental, for which it serves
as occasion. in this manner, non-philosophy effectively sepa­
rates the amphibologies of the philosophical transcendental
(with the empirical and with the real) from the "subjective"
identities of which they are the symptom, and it does this
without claiming to dissolve these amphibologies. such an
immediate dissolution of the latter would suppose that the
one-in-one, the real, is identical with one of their sides: this
unilateral identification irrevocably leads to a new transcen­
dental philosophy (m. henry) and again to the vanishment
of the real.

#transcendenta*l axiomatics
the nature and procedure of formation of non-philosophy 's
first terms, of its non-conceptual symbols, on the basis of the
concepts that arisefrom philosophical intuitivity and philosoph­
ical naivete.

axiomatics is primarily a scientific object. it is the organization
of a theory or of a fragment of a theory in order to empty the
terms of their empirical or regional contents and explicitly reveal
the logical apparatus which unites them and thereby becomes
their only content.there is a philosophical reflection on axiomat­
ics (aristotle), but there are few examples of axiomatization in
philosophy itself. if not perhaps in descartes' " repl ies to the sec­
ond set of objections," spinoza's ethics and fichte's 1 794 wis­
senscha�slehre. i n all these cases it is a matter of an ontological
axiomatization that is stil l intuitive in a broad sense. in the scienc­
es, more or less complete attempts at axiomatization were made
in particular by h i l bert in geometry, by jean-louis destouches
in quantum physics-i.e. above all in fields where unexpected
innovations (non-eucl i dean geometries, heisenberg's "uncer­
tainty' ' principle) required theoretical reorganization in order to
guarantee their rigor: mario bunge's epistemology draws various
conclusions from the postulate that it is in theory possible to
axiomatize every scientific domain. but axiomatization is an effort
of reorganization that comes afterward-indeed, after crisis-in
view of examining the validity of a theory and the formalization
of its relations to other theories, an activity which in any event
has known limits (godel).this is more of a theoretical instrument
than a theoretical project for the foundation of science.
in opposition to a formal axiomatics applied to a body
of scientific knowledge and in opposition to an ontologi­
cal and intellectualist axiomatics that is still intuitive (for
example, descartes's i think, therefore i am or husserl 's i
am-the world is), pure transcendenta*l axiomatics forms
first terms or first names, i.e. non-conceptual symbols, on
the basis of the intuitive and naive concepts of philosophy.
it explicitly inscribes in the writing of these first names
the suspension of their philosophical sense (e.g. one­
without-being, lived-without-life, given-without-givenness,
one-outside-being, etc.) or of thier sense's worldly and/or
1 50

ontological intuitivity. it gives them a radical theoretical uni­
versality that cannot be divided into "generality" and into
"totality" ; and a transcendental, or univocal, universality val­
id for all philosophy.this decision of nomination-decision
which is itself non-philosophical, determined-in-the-last-in­
stance by vision-in-one-is the first transcendental act of
force (of) thought.this is to say that instead of being subser­
vient to a philosophical project of foundation, even that of
science's autofoundation, it is nothing but a transcendental
instrument determined-in-the-last-instance by the real, be­
cause thought (thought according to the one) uses science
as much as it uses philosophy.
it is no longer a question of a logico-formal, scientific axi­
omatization of philosophy-an absurd project that would
misrecognize the latter's irreducibly transcendental style.
non-philosophy does not claim to reorganize the system of
philosophy after one of its crises. to axiomatize is its first
ordinary practice of philosophy, in accordance with the
"abstraction" or the being-separated-without-separation
of the real-of-the-last-instance. thought is condemned to
resort to philosophy and to its language but by rendering
philosophy's language adequate to the non-philosophical
essence of this thought which claims to be commensurate
with the real.

#transcendenta*l science
other* name for non-philosophy in its form of unified theory of
science and ofphilosophy or in its form offirst science.

transcendental philosophy aspires to be constituted into tran­
scendental science (into transcendental logic variously associated
with an intuition and with experience-kant, husserl). in this
sense, science fulfi lls a philosophical aim that conserves its pri­
macy.the former conveys theoretical knowledges or forms, while
the latter contributes the immanent or transcendental d imen­
sion of truth's relation to experience or to the world. philosophy
pursues its scientific dream through transcendenta*l science: to
become a rigorous science in the critique of metaphysics (kant)
or in the foundation of the positive sciences (husserl).

151

transcendenta*l science in its non-philosophical realization
as first science can be characterized: i . by its material: the
scientific forms of theory or even of particular scientific
theories, and the philosophical forms of thought or of philo­
sophical decision; 2 . by its unifying-without-synthesis cause,
vision-in-one rather than the structure of philosophical de­
cision; 3. by its "method," which is the unification in identity
of-the-last-instance of the scientific or theoretical explica­
tion, irreducible to the explicated properties of its objects,
and of the philosophical or transcendental relation to these
objects; 4. by its internal object: on the one hand, on the side
of vision-in-one or the real, the subject of this transcenden­
tal science, a cloned transcendental subject, motivated but
not co-determined by objects or experience; on the other
hand, on the side of experience or of the material, the sense
(of) identity (and its modalities) of this material such as it is
lived by the subject, i.e. the essence (of) science, which is
not the essence of " science" [la science] but the essence of
the science-philosophy mixture.
transcendenta*l science in its philosophical version is
of metaphysical origin (its cause is being, since here the
transcendental has the real's primacy): of unitary (it is the
mixture of science and philosophy) and inegalitarian (it is
hierarchy, domination of the latter over the former) spirit.
in its non-philosophical version, it is real before being tran­
scendental (its cause is vision-in-one); it is of "unified" (it
is identity-in-the-last-instance of science and philosophy, or
science-thought) and egalitarian (science and philosophy
intervene here equally and in-identity) spirit. it is the "com­
bination" of the real's primacy in the form of "determina­
tion-in-the-last-instance " ; of the priority of science-thought
in the form of transcendental commencement or of the
first transcendental; and ultimately of the specific scientific
requirement in the form of theoretical explication as non­
image, non-representation of the object to be explicated.

#unconscious
syntactic dimension of jouissance whose dimension of reality
is desire.

the unconscious designates one of the modes of representation;
initially with descartes a negative mode under which representa­
tion comes to be lacking, and then, with leibn iz, a privative mode
of representation itself as unperceived representation. in kant,
the absence of a rad ical or real foundation of representations
can be interpreted as the position of an unconscious. following
this path, the unconscious becomes the quasi-synonym of the
wi ll (schopenhauer) , at least when it is not that of nature or of
the idealized object (schelling) , or even that of life (nietzsche,
bergson, deleuze). a transcendental deduction a la m ichel henry
illustrates the genealogy of the unconscious in its transm ission
from philosophy to psychoanalysis. i n effect, psychoanalysis uses
the term of the unconscious not merely to indicate one of the
topographic properties of the psychic apparatus-the product
of repression constituted by thing-presentations (freud, melanie
klein)-but also the dimension of the imaginary uung) or sym­
bolic (lacan) other*; but nevertheless generally endowed with a
"subject" that lacan estimates as being "nothing but the cartesian
subject:' i n view of this transcendental solidarity that makes the
unconscious appear as the support of an epistemological circle,
it is therefore legitimate to consider this notion as the major axis
of the philosophico-analytic complex (or m ixture) or moreover
to identify the unconscious as an invention (but not an illusion)
of psychoanalysis.
non-psychoanalysis extricates a radical transcendental un­
conscious in the wake of the real (the one). the uncon­
scious is the syntactic side of jouissance, which in non­
psychoanalysis is itself a concept on the same level as the
stranger's essence. non-psychoanalysis is nothing but the
transcendental mathesis of unconscious jouissance. but in
opposition to the restrained unconscious or the unconscious
determined by the signifier, the combinatory or logic, there
is nothing transcendent about the non-psychoanalytical un­
conscious, as there is with "the autonomy of the symbolic" :
it i s the identity o f jouissance and of a unilateral duality.
1 53

together they form such a duality with the enjoyed or the
real, which does not exclude that other syntactic aspects
can overdetermine jouissance, yet merely overdetermine
it-this excludes every concept of phallic jouissance, or
jouissance itself determined by the "signifier of the uncon­
scious." ultimately, the expression "the other*'s jouissance"
seems redundant since the unconscious is already the union
ofjouissance and the other*. instead, there is no jouissance
of the one, the one is the ]oui-sansjouissance.
to the extent that the signifier, vis-a-vis the acquisitions
of linguistics generalized here, is dual or unilateral, it rep­
resents no subject (of the) unconscious, but jouissance it­
self.]ouissance is the identity of desire and of syntax. that
it is non-signifying (of) self specifies the unconscious as
non-phallic, as transcendental autonomy without repetition,
without other* of the other* (which is one last form of the
other*'s autoposition). the unconscious does not even have
the other* for its subject, because what psychoanalysis calls
subject is simultaneously transcendent and immanent to
the signifier, and because the signifier signifies nothing but
the other*-which is a way of calling it driven. it is emp­
ty without forming an ontological void, it is other* rather
than being, but an other* whose essence resides in-the-last­
instance in the one. in a sense, the unconscious is so foreign
to the cartesian concept of subject that such a subject of
the unconscious would be equivalent to the foreclosure of
jouissance. this foreclosure is perhaps materialized in psy­
choanalysis by the concept of sex as signifier of a hole in
knowledge and (non-) truth of the signifier.

#universal noesis
non-real dimension of the stranger-subject constituted by two
functional (transcendental and aprioristic) identities cloned
from phenomenology and supposing their universion by the
one. in its essence, noesis is not of the nature of o�jectifying
or intentional transcendence, but of the uni-versa/ nature of
a being-turned-without-return-toward . . . (the world), even if
its last moment is non-autopositional or non-phenomenological
distance. it can be called determined-in-the-last-instance by
the real in reference to its occasion .

1 54

husserl, in the wake of intentionality, rei ntroduced the ancient
thematics of noesis and noema i nto modern philosophy. noesis
designates the act of aiming at the intentional object (of the no­
ema) , an act susceptible to various qualities.this is a lived experi­
ence but a non-hyletic or non-real l ived experience that has no
sense except in its correlation with the noema. it is thus of the
general nature of transcendence, to which its character of imma­
nence remains subordinate. hence the typical ly philosophical, not
scientific, idea of a correlation, parallelism or semi-circularity of
noesis and noema. this is the fundamental dyad of the phenom­
enological decision insofar as it is structured as a phi losophical
decision.
it is possible to reemploy the noetico-noematic correlation
under another reason-that of vision-in-one-by purging
it of all philosophical circularity. noesis will designate the
instances cloned by the real on the basis of the phenom­
enological material of the transcendental ego and of inten­
tional noesis. these instances, uni-versal by definition, are
consequently determined in-the-last-instance by the one,
as if, henceforth, intention were no longer mixed or co­
exclusive with the "hyle" but determined unilaterally by it
(which is also uprooted from its state of sensual and thus
worldly exteriority). these two functions, motivated by
philosophy's occasion which indicates them symptomati­
cally, are identities and not modes of transcendence: they
are transcendental and aprioristic identities. however, tran­
scendence has the content of a distance or an "open" exte­
riority that is not self-enclosed in an auto-position, but it is
also already oriented by essence and in an immanent way
"toward" the world as such in its identity, rather than to­
ward an object-pole or a world-pole like that toward which
phenomenological intentionality transcends. universion is
obviously what gives to force (of) thought, to the stranger­
subject, its non-philosophical uni-versality, its capacity for
accessing worl*d-thought itself. the functional and univer­
sal character attributed to the intentionality of conscious­
ness by husserl is radicalized even further than the way
in which intentionality is originarily oriented toward the
world itself in its noematic identity, rather than toward
the object in a world-horizon, and is determined by the
one 's last-instance which alone gives it this amplitude of
1 55

uni-versality. this is how a universe-noesis is substituted for
the world-intention of phenomenology at the same time as
a universe-noema is substituted for world-noema.

#universal pragmatics
one of non-philosophy 's two styles alongside the theoretical. in­
stead of being its own essence, as in philosophy, pragmatics is
this non objectifying proximity-here radicaj.-of the one to
the world, the usage of the latter by the former or by force (of)
thought. its essence is thus the cloning universion by the real
that devotes the stranger-subject to the usage of the world. in
virtue of this essence, it is transcendental and universal (uni­
versal).

rather than enumerati ng the explicitly pragmatist games, dewey)
or pragmaticist (peirce) philosophies, with their avatars (rorty) ,
or rather than tracing the great l ines of pragmatics as a theory of
discourse, it is interesting to isolate the elementary syntactic ker­
nel of every pragmatic attitude as usage or pragmateia of thi ngs
(including discourse) in opposition to the theoretical attitude.
pragmatics is cal led the semi-relation of usage or of proximity, of
the identification of a term y with a term x which is independent
or which is distinguished, on its side, from y. this identification
is a way of being turned, a turning, a turn of y toward x, thus
a non-objectification of an objective term x, i n some sense a
semi-objectivity distinct from theoretical objectification, which is
bilateral and reciprocal more or less in the long run. hence--this
is an example but one that gives the essence of pragmatics­
phenomenology's spontaneous pragmatics which describe, in a
quasi-mimetic or identificatory way, independent objects that re­
fuse to identify with their description and affirm their autonomy
"in-itself," such as the givenness of ideal objectivity or of the iden­
tity of the thing in person throughout the multiplicity of aims or
of attempts (husserl) : or the usage of being by being and of being
by being (heidegger). these examples demonstrate the scope of
the pragmatic posture at the core of all contemporary philoso­
phy. it is essential to note that, despite the i ndependence of the
term x distinguishing itself from y which is not d istinguished from
it. th is schema of unilateral ity veers toward a sem i-circularity or
a broken circularity, no doubt, but which conserves as essence

1 56

the auto positional circularity of identifi cation (of y with x) itself
this syntactic aspect in general is combi ned with an experience
of the real as acting or action and is better known as the crite­
rion of pragmatic thought. action is then the ultimate criterion
that allows for the dissolution of the conceptual confusions of
metaphysics; it is in order to distinguish real ly clear ideas from
those which are only clear by appearance that this action is itself
conceived rational ly (peirce) or conceived in a more practical
and sensible manner games) .
non-philosophy conserves the irreducible syntactic kernel
of a proximity or of a certain identification of the subject
with the world in general in the usage it makes of the latter.
but by transferring this kernel onto the terrain of the real
or of vision-in-one, non-philosophy changes its essence, its
real status and therefore its importance for thought.the uni­
lateral semi-relation loses the essence of circularity which it
secretly or ultimately possesses in philosophical pragmat­
ics and which determines that the immediate identification
of y with x be auto-positional, reversible and alienating of
y if y is the inalienable real, it cannot itself be identified
with the world, except in the "mediating" form of a cloned
transcendental function, which it is not but to which it con­
tributes by cloning, since this cloning is provoked by the oc­
casion that the world is.thus the non-objectifying syntax of
proximity to an "objectivity" subsists, but only by receiving
for essence the real's cloning operation, which is itself sub­
stituted for the autoposition or the circularity of philosophi­
cal identification. the real is identified with the world only
by cloning and by this occasion, which guarantees its pro­
tection against the return to it of the turning-toward . . . the
world, while it simultaneously guarantees the world's rela­
tive autonomy and its unilaterality.as for force (ot) thought,
it is devoted to worl*d-thought, the stranger is turned-toward
the world. but instead of this occurring two-times-each-time
and thus being enclosed in the magic orbit of philosophy,
this only happens one-time-each-time, delivering them from
the oldest slavery and tempting them much less by the vain
hope of a metaphysical flight, from which the heideggerian
"turning" toward being by being did not sufficiently protect
them. when man stops being at being's disposal and when
being comes to the disposal of man-as-one, the "turning"
1 57

toward being will only be " occasionalely" motivated by the
latter and determined by one-man as cloning.
understood or "dualyzed" in this way, pragmatics defines
one of the two aspects of non-philosophy, the other being
its theoretical aspect. it certainly gives rise to a first prag­
matics, but without primacy, since it is no longer autopo­
sitional and no longer claims to be real like pragmatic phi­
losophies, i.e. "pragmatisms." but more than ever, pragmatics
is transcendental (not claiming to be real but determined
in-the-last-instance by the real) and uni-versal (produced
by uni-version): a pragmatics for philosophy and the world
themselves. as for the acting aspect or action of this uni­
versal pragmatics, it arises from the real as being-performed
in-the-last-instance and from force (of) thought as performa­
tional. thought is precisely force (of thought) for reasons of
pragmatic syntax, reasons of the usage of the world by the
subject who unilaterally identifies with it.

#universality
vision-in-one 's character of giving or manifesting every x in
the mode of the one itself or that ofgiven-without-givenness and
of separated-without-separation . far from being self-enclosed,
it is de jure open-without-ekstasis to the world in an immanent
way. uni-versality determines-in-the-last-instance non-philoso­
phy 's "non-euclidean " generality and gives it its sense.

universality is an overdeterm ined concept arising from the com­
bination of philosophical decision's own structure and of the sci­
entific knowledges that it requires. decision presents two levels
of universal ity: that of the dyad as a level of the a priori, which is
universal and necessary (universality in the a priori mode); that
of the unity of synthesis or of the system (un iversal ity in a tran­
scendental mode) in the sense of totality or of the one-al l. a
neighboring description of the preceding discerns in metaphys­
ics the onto-theo-logical triangulation of an ontological base, the
dyad of being and of being, and of a summit constituted by the
being cause par excel lence, god, who determines the horizon­
tal base or plane. but perhaps this is sti l l a restrained, historical
and doctrinal version of a more universal structure which would
be the crossing of two axes: the horizontal axis of being and of
1 58

being, and the vertical axis, which is instead ontic, of the one
and of the m u ltiple, a structure on the verge of closure through
a double process of recovery: of being and of the multiple, of be­
ing and of the one.the so-called formal ization of "phi losophical
decision" extracts the minimal structure in common with these
models and reveals the two connected planes of universality.the
essentials of the phi losophical type of universality are in the con­
nection of these two planes, thus in a un itary conception of the
universal as divided into generality and totality; which are founded
on division or are that of the dyadic type. in short. this structure is
varied by diverse positions and doctrinal decisions, by the jumble
of "theories" of generality and universality.
generality and universality are emphatically distinguished
(sometimes written uni-versality in order to indicate its true
scope and to distinguish it from its philosophical concept),
but in a non-unitary mode, without division or philosophi­
cal decision, in such a way that they lose their connected­
ness or their mixture-form.
uni-versality is vision-in-one's essence which, instead
of being self-enclosed as an "inside" or blended with a tran­
scendence, is an immanence without transcendence but
not without uni-versality. the distinction of a uni-versality
specific to the most radical immanence, without transcen­
dence but which forms a system with the being-foreclosed
of the former, is non-philosophy's fundamental theoretical
acquisition and is what distinguishes it from the mixed so­
lutions of the "philosophies of immanence" (m. henry in­
cluded). this uni-versality is taken in a "literal" sense: as the
being-turned of immanence or of the one toward . . . , as
non-ekstatic open, availability-without-transcending, in the
sense in which vision-in-one can always give the world but
without-givenness. this uni-versality is also to be taken as
a completely negative condition just like vision-in-one, the
absolutely necessary but also totally insufficient sine qua
non, refusing to conflate necessity and sufficiency in the
principle of reason like philosophy does. vision-in-one is a
"principle" of radical non-sufficiency that precisely gives the
scope and sense of its uni-versality to non-philosophy. it can
be said of the latter that-without being a completely nega­
tive doctrine or a negative philosophy-it is a uni-versal but
non-sufficient theory that must be effectuated in different
1 59

philosophical vocabularies, which in a sense means that it
participates in an axiomatics.
on the other hand, non-philosophy's generality is a fea­
ture of its organ on, of the force (of) thought or stranger­
subject. if uni-versality is real, neither transcendental nor
logical, generality is transcendental and not real: it is a prop­
erty of first terms, of axioms and of what is deduced from
them in the theory of the subject and in that of the identity
(of) worl*d-thought. it can also be said of this generality that
due to its origins, which are neither philosophical nor sci­
entific, it is determined-in-the-last-instance by uni-versality.
the philosophical relations of philosophy and science are
redistributed in a non-unitary sense. the generality of force
(of) thought is indeed also an identity. it is said of mixtures
or of couplings and is no longer divided by philosophical
decision or faith, for it is the transcendental effectuation (by
cloning) of real "negative" uni-versality. it is therefore also a
universality, but positive and more concrete than vision-in­
one. cloning excludes unitary mixtures, the connectedness
of universality and generality. non-philosophy stops "gener­
alizing" philosophy itself, but it can only do so by resorting
to the last-instance of a real uni-versality ignored by philos­
ophy. the "non-euclidean" model has aided in non-philoso­
phy's constitution, and it effectively functions on a certain
level of elaboration, i.e. it is a possible scientific material.
but it is itself aligned with the experience of vision-in-one
as uni-versal.

#universe-language
clone-according-to-the-one of the logos, i.e. of the philosophical
mixture of thought and of language. language and its function
of ontological opening, of world-language, is received in its sense
(oj) identity by force (oj) thought as universe-language, or uni­
versal in-the-last-instancefor philosophy, the world and the logos
itself universe-language is the identity (oj) world-language or of
the logos.

on the hither side of the various philosophical conceptions of
language, a philosophical invariant consists in bestowing upon lan­
guage a transcendental function (in a broad sense) of world, of
1 60

opening and of being. hence its status as both (real) referent and
as explicit or implicit organon of philosophy. to speak is always
and in every way to open, to tear, to surpass, to transcend.this
transcendental opening is a dimension that finds its empirical con­
dition of existence in the variable l ingu istic gaps between signifier.
signified, signification, sense, sign, etc. the " l inguistic turn" is noth­
ing but a possibility programmed by the essence of phi losophical
decision and actual ized by supplementary historical causes.
non-philosophical pragmatics recognizes itself as language's
activity, but it treats language as an inert material vis-a-vis its
properties of logos, since the one determines it in-the-last­
instance without the mediation of philosophy's operations.
thus the following will be distinguished:
1) language as claiming to be constitutive or co-constitu­
tive of the real itself (philosophy), a linguistico-philosoph­
ical appearance or world-language that non-philosophy
transforms into simple material;
2) the transcendental-axiomatic usage of language as
clone in-the-last-instance of language-in-philosophy;
3) language in its signifying and signified layer as support
of the reality of force (of) thought and of the non-philosoph­
ical a prioris, i.e. the duality of the (non-) one, since the
support is a function that is more than the clone-according­
to-the-one and less than the constitution of the real (phi­
losophy) by language or the logos.
language is necessary for the axiomatic formulation of
the one and of force (of) thought, if at least one proposes
to think according-to-the-one. on the other hand, it is not
necessary for the one's essence or for its internal structure.
the axiomatic position of the real, i.e. thought according
to the one as non-philosophy, is contingent in relation to
it: it indeed has its determination in it but only in-the-last­
instance. by using language as a simple material inseparable
from the philosophical concept, non-philosophy restores
its essence to it: it transforms it into a mode of the (non­
) one. language can describe the one without reflecting
it specularly or redoubling it. consequently, there can be
161

multiple formulations of the one that are contingent or not
constitutive of its essence and conditioned simply by the va­
riety of material. the axiomatic descriptions of the one, of
force (of) thought and of the philosophical material's sense
(of) identity no longer designate the finite-infinite form of a
world but arise, through their being-manifested-in-the-last­
instance, from the immanent uni-verse that harbors vision­
in-one. the usage of language 's logos supposes a sponta­
neous autofactualization and a fetishization of language. its
setting-in-universe defetishizes it as much as possible by re­
lating it to its aprioristic, transcendental and ultimately real
conditions. this clone, produced on the basis of the logos
or of world-language, can be called "universe-language." in
vision-in-one, language is given-without-givenness, unen­
gendered and unengendering, sterile, delivered from the
ends and subjugations of poetry. this usage of language
without closure-where language is no longer its own clo­
sure as in wittgenstein-supposes that it stops defining and
delimiting thought's pragmatic aspect and instead becomes
the object of a pragmatics defined from somewhere other
than itself.

#universe-noema
immanent object offorce (oj) thought or of the stranger-sub­
ject which, univerted toward and by the latter, is related to it
in a non-intentional way as its correlate (its uni/ate) of sense.
universal noematic form is an identity (in-the-last-instance) of
sense. worl*d-thought is given to the stranger through the sense
of being occasion-in-the-last-instance, i.e. foreclosure of the
real or other*-than-one. a more restrained concept of noema
would designate the occasionale sense acquired by the phenom­
enological noema as correlate of non-autopositional distance
("equivalent " of intentionality) .

i n phenomenology where this notion has found its ful l usage,
noema is the correlate of the sense of noesis, sense of the object,
and is constituted by the multiplicity of the modes or ways in
which noesis is given. the noema is thus the intentional sense of
an object in the world, not yet the uni-versal sense (by univer­
sion) of the world itself or its identity for the stranger-subject.
like noesis, noema is constrained in this context to a more or
1 62

less deferred circularity with noesis, a parallelism founded upon
an identity or sameness rather than broken by a determination­
in-the-last-instance, i.e. founded upon a correlation rather t h a n
a "unilation."
if the stranger-subject is constituted by a game of (philo­
sophical) occasions which are universions (effects of the
universality of the one), then it is not manifested without
the series of philosophy's "occasionale" interventions be­
ing manifested in relation to it. the first reduction-called
"real" -of philosophical sufficiency specifically transforms
worl*d-thought into a simple occasion of cloning by the one.
the state of " occasionale cause" is thus the noematic sense
in person that is said of worl*d-thought. this sense is that of
being, for philosophy, the one's foreclosure. in other words,
the noematic identity (of) philosophy gives it as "other*­
than-one," the first appearance of an alterity as object of the
stranger. ultimately the non-philosophical noema contains a
variety of determinations corresponding to the main modes
of philosophy's auto-presentation.these determinations are
all occasionale or determined in-the-last-instance by their
first state of occasion. this has allowed them to enter into
the noematic sphere of non-philosophical sense and to be
modes of the other*-than-one. but they all participate in the
universal essence of the non-philosophical noema-noema
(of the) world and unilate of the stranger-which will be
called "universe-noema" to distinguish it from "world-noe­
ma," which is that of phenomenology and is restricted to
intentionality.

#universion
effectuation of the one 's "negative " uni-versality in the occa­
sion and its causality; but not an effectuation of the one itself,
foreclosed and inalienable under any effect whatsoever. tbis is
one of the real 's three effects, alongside uni-identification and
unilateralization .

philosophies of the one following the platonic tradition obvi­
ously kn ow convers i o n as return to the one "alongside"
procession; mystics, the reversion of the soul to its identity with
163

god; metaphysical ontology, the convertibility of the one and
bei ng; the thought of being's truth, "turn ing" (kehre) as sem i-ver­
sion; schizoanalysis, the reversion of desire to its auto-productive
essence. every philosophy in fact knows "circumversion," the ver­
sion, circular to various degrees, of breaking and opening, of tran­
scendental ity or empiricity, of topography or topology, of inver­
sion or reversal of extremes, etc. i n each scenario, the circle is the
fi rst element of the "version" which is nothing but an abstract arc
and which always carries the dotted-line tracing of this circularity
specific to philosophy.
defined as one-in-one, the real is inalienable in effects or
objects, for example in the uni-identity and unilaterality
through which it affects the grasping of any given. it is also
inalienable in the functional instances to which it gives rise
on the basis of its "negative" uni-versality or in which it is, so
to speak, effectuated (rather than simply proceeding from it
or converting with it) under the "occasionale" effect of phi­
losophy or of worl*d-thought. the occasionale cause is thus
univerted to the one or is immanent-in-the-last-instance. it is
under this aspect that it will constitute the material for the
cloning of force (of) thought.
the possibility of universion itself must be sought, not in
an external and brute causality of worl*d-thought over vision­
in-one supposed isolated, but in the latter's essence insofar
as it is the place of the uni-versal and obligated, albeit nega­
tive, being-given of worl*d-thought. its radical immanence
and its "empty" indifference do not signify a closure but the
negative condition of a uni-versal opening to every form of
transcendence, consequently an opening which is itself im­
manent or without transcendence and which univerts this
transcendence. uni-version is thus the de jure operation of
the one's uni-versality that definitely does not depend upon
any occasion but simply upon the one 's essence of radical
inherence. from this point of view, non-philosophy is the
discovery and exploitation of the uni-versality specific to
radical identity which philosophy has ignored.
thus replaced on the real terrain of uni-version, the "ver­
sion" loses its philosophical nature of "turning," bi-lateral
or di-rectional turning. it acquires an identity, identity (of)
turning, which it has never had, even in the heideggerian
kehre. it is the ultimate condition of cloning in general in its
1 64

noetic, transcendental and aprioristic forms. but it is its es­
sence, the uni-versality of the one, which in general makes
of the subject a stranger given over to the world, subject-for­
the-world, from the one rather than from the world, turned
one time each time toward it; consequently, from which it is
impossible to "turn away." by definition given a perfect mys­
tical essence but which gives-without-givenness the world,
man can only be turned irreversibly to the world and can
only claim to "return" to an essence that he never lost.
universion in particular transforms the a priori of phe­
nomenological intentionality. the latter, without being an­
nihilated as movement from one aim toward another, on
the one hand stops being held by transcendence (transcen­
dence is now nothing but its occasionale cause); on the
other hand, it stops being essence of itself or autopositional;
lastly, it stops being governed by an object-pole with which
it would have to identify and alienate itself in. restored to
its essence of uni-versality, intentionality is freed from con­
sciousness-form and object-form: it is only " of" to the extent
that it is primarily "for" or "toward." universion gives to force
(of) thought its uni-versality which allows it to be valid for
the world itself and no longer for just another object.

#real
firstfundamental concept of non-philosophy, equivalent to the
"one-in-one" or the "real. " that which determines in-the-last­
instance the theory and pragmatics of worl*d-thought ('philoso­
phy "). vision-in-one is radically immanent and uni-versa!; this
is why it gives-without-givenness the givenness of worl*d-thought.

philosophy is the desire and repression of the one, divisible or
associated with a division. the problematizations of being (hei­
degger included) suppose this one barred without real ly the­
matizing it the problematizations of the one (plato, neo-pla­
tonism, lacan) suppose one last convertibil ity with being based
on the fact that this convertibility gives one last objectification,
which they al ign with the criteria of being or which they abstract
from it all "thoughts of the one" are stil l structured as meta­
physics: they keep an ultimate connection with the metaphysical
d o u b l et of the s c i e n c e of being a n d s c i e n ce of the o n e .
1 65

hence the necessary downfal l of the greek one to its empirical
component, the one of the count or of counting (badiou), a point
of extreme conflict of being and the one and the "death" of the
latter: the philosophy that wishes to be post-metaphysical oscil­
lates, in the best case, between the end of being and the end of
the one, and therefore never stops honoring metaphysics.
non-philosophy formulates an open series of axioms on the
one understood as vision-in-one and no longer as desired one:
1) the one is radical immanence, identity-without-tran­
scendence, not associated with a transcendence or a divi­
sion.
2) the one is in-one or vision-in-one and not in-being or
in-difference.
3) the one is the real insofar as it is foreclosed to all
symbolization (thought, knowledge, etc.).
4) the one is given-without-givenness and separated­
without-separation-of givenness.
5) the one is that which determines or gives in-the-last­
instance worl*d-thought as given (object of a givenness) .
non-philosophy renounces being thought-of-the-one or
desire-of-the-one, but this renunciation has a higher pur­
pose than the renunciation of desire: the one-in-one is the
unknown of philosophy, that which is de jure foreclosed
to the latter but which, in conflation with its concept of
the transcendental one or transcendent one, philosophy
believes to be able to think, even sometimes to think it ap­
proximately as a repression. philosophy represses its own
"one" but forecloses the being-foreclosed of the one-in­
one in its own way.this conflation is philosophy's faith and
sufficiency, which vision-in-one lifts in its commencement.
non-philosophy is established on a wholly other terrain
than philosophy or, better yet, on the atopos that the real
is. philosophy is produced as a ground that it takes as the
real in an illusory way, even though its only "real" ground is
experience, whereas non-philosophy takes its departure in
1 66

the utopia (of the) real. this is not a "utopia" in the vulgar
or even philosophical sense, but a thought-according-to-uto­
pia. utopia determines-in-the-last-instance the thought that
takes worl*d-thought as its object. rather than the intermi­
nable end (death and gathering) of metaphysics, it is a ques­
tion of its identity, such that this identity (ot) metaphysics
invalidates or unilateralizes its sufficiency and its authority.
with this substitution of thought-according-to-the-one for
thought or science of the one, the triumph or downfall of
the greek one, of the desired one, whether it be conveyed
or cast down by the multiple (deleuze/badiou), is of little
importance: the one's philosophical adventures are proper­
ties of non-philosophy's object as vision-in-one, and nothing
more.
in any case, vision-in-one "gives" the one and it alone; it
is "the" given entirely, the given as the identity (of the) given,
as given-without-givenness, outside-the-fold or the doublet of
the given and givenness. it is thus radical phenomenon with­
out the phenomenological hinter-world in its broadest sense:
without being behind the phenomenon or connected with
it, without givenness behind the given or connected with it.
but if it only gives the one and thus neither exceeds it nor is
alienated from it, it also gives worl*d-thought, but it still gives
it in-one or in the "form" of given-without-givenness. the
givenness-of-the-given (worl*d-thought) is the object of a non­
philosophical givenness by force (ot) thought, since the latter
is itself given-without-givenness or given-in-the-last-instance.
vision-in-one is thus universal-in-immanence rather than uni­
versal by transcendence, extension, generality, etc. universal­
in-immanence must be written as uni-versal: in the sense that
the one, all while remaining in its immanence foreclosed to
worl*d-thought, can receive the latter without being affected
by it, or can be offered to it and opened by an openness-with­
out-horizon, by a completely immanent instasis. in a sense,
the one is "for-the-world," understanding that "for" does not
signify any internal or external finality; this is an availability by
indifference (and not an indifference by abstraction, which is
the way that indifference is generally understood).

#world
alongside "philosophy," otherfirst name for the mixture ofphi­
losophy and of the world. philosophy is the world's pure and
general form, the world is philosophy 's immanent object. in
short: "worl*d-thought. " '/bis is the identity of this mixture and
not simply this mixture thought vis-a-vis itself, namely in an
intra-philosophical or intra-worldly way.

the world is the object of cosmological meditation, either in
terms of pre-kantian metaphysics or in terms of a transcendental
constitution by principles. in husserl the natural, even regulatory,
thesis of the world is suspended, while in heidegger what com­
prised the horizon of the world, correlate of an infi n ite potential
intentionality, becomes, over-determined by the christian experi­
ence of the world, the first phenomenon of the existential ana­
lytic of dasein as being-in-the-world. philosophy has always had
a special affinity with the world as its originary dimension (the
greeks and kant) to the point of reciprocating with it (marx, phi­
losophy's becoming-world, the world's becoming-phi losophy) .
the distinction between the world and the one (or man) is
central to non-philosophy-its dual dimension. the world
is the authority of authorities, whereas the one defines the
order of minorities or strangers. in this sense, the world is
radically transcendent to man's one-essence, and we are
not in-the-world. but the world is unilateralized by the one
which determines it in-the-last-instance both in the contin­
gency of its "occasionale" givenness and in its usage. the
world has stopped being an object of philosophy, of special
metaphysics or of the fundamental, to become its immanent
object when philosophy is thought in its broadest general­
ity as worl*d-thought. in other words, now it forms with the
world, seen-in-one-in-the-last-instance, more than a unitary
mixture, more than a simple reciprocation: the noematic
sense or identity (of) this mixture.
man-in-one is the real condition of the only possible sci­
ence of this englobing mixture. as transcendenta*l science
and determined by man in-the-last-instance, it possesses
a mystical aspect linked to a real difference of the one
and the world, or unilateral dual(ity) difference. contrary
to the postulate of unitary or philosophical thought, this

1 68

expression signifies that there is no reversibility of the
world's givenness and the one 's given.
the unitary illusion-real appearance then transcen­
dental appearance-is characteristic of the world, which
necessarily resists the one with all its philosophical forces.
the reason for this resistance is that the world is a mixture
of the (hallucinated) real and of the philosophical logico­
real, since this mixture is therefore not the real itself but
effectivity. but the sense of this resistance only appears with
vision-in-one, which manifests worl*d-thought as a sort of
foreclosure of the real that would not be able to forget it
but only hallucinate it and, as a result, hallucinate its relation
of foreclosure as simple "forgetting."the one thus manifests
this resistance and suspends it by making it appear as a
foreclosure. the relation of man and the world is dualyzed
in this way, the latter being emplaced or unilateralized and
treated as correlate (or unilate, more precisely) of the one.
what does this mean?
the world is no longer an object or an envelopment from
which the one would incessantly have to try to distinguish
itself, an object flooded by an intentionality or vice versa.as
reduced, it remains the phenomenon (in a non-phenomeno­
logical sense) of occasion and the triple function (nomina­
tion, indication, cloning) that the occasion fulfills with re­
gard not merely to the one itself, but to the subject or force
(of) thought. thus, non-philosophy escapes from the hatred
fascinated with the world (philosophy), which it takes "such
as it is" ; man abandons the world and its thought, philoso­
phy, to their destiny and no longer pursues any project with
respect to what they are in themselves. on the other hand,
as simple occasion, it gives rise to a theoretical and prag­
matic acting that expresses the one's generosity of-the-last­
instance which recognizes a right to the world. the world is
thus the material from whence non-philosophical pragmat­
ics extracts the sense of the world, not objective sense but
occasionale (without autoposition). this occasionale sense
(the equivalent of a noema), rather than "the world itself"
or a "being-in-the-world," is the identity (of) worl*d-thought.
thus the stranger who is constituted, save in his real es­
sence, with the support of occasionale causality is unbound
from any essential relation to the world (but not from all
"relation") and as a result unbinds the world itself from the
1 69

primacy of being. non-philosophy renounces every tran­
scendental deduction of the world, which is supposed
given, but proceeds to a transcendental "deduction" of the
stranger with the world's cooperation.

#worl*d-thought
other name for philosophy in the broadest non-philosophical
comprehension of its concept. worl*d-thought is all thought
founded upon the principal recourse to transcendence and
the secondary recourse (by right or in fact) to immanence, i.e.
their hierarchized mixture.

philosophy has always involved the tightest relations with the
world, primarily as thought that posits cosm ic order or cosmo­
pol itical order: hence its more properly physical, even physicalist,
i nterest in the "world" (descartes for example) , or metaphysi­
cal interest in the origin of the world and its antinomies (kant) ,
or phenomenological interest in the "l ife-world." heidegger was
able to cross this greco-philosophical theme with the christian
theme of the "world" and of its madness-wisdom in the elucida­
tion of being-in-the-world as dasein's basic structure.
if the world belongs to the ultimate concept of philosophy,
non-philosophy radicalizes this belonging by deciding to
call philosophy, in its identity, worl*d-thought, i.e. all thought
that utilizes transcending as its principal operation or that
simply resorts to it so as to constitute the real, including the
so-called "philosophies of immanence" -spinoza, nietzsche,
deleuze-who still resort to transcendence and who ground
it in an overly limited concept because they wrongly believe
to have eliminated it. non-philosophy knots the world and
philosophy more tightly by making the latter a sort of gener­
al form of the former which, in this way, is no longer defined
by its content of beings. and, as a unique object, it gives
this worl*d-thought with its congenital empiricism and its
powerless desire for the one to vision-in-one.worl*d-thought
is then auto-presented in several distinct but continuously
linked forms (philosophical faith; philosophical existence
as transcendental mixture; transcendence as mixture's
a priori essence) . in short, non-philosophy posits not the
1 70

co-belonging but the identity-of-the-last-instance of philoso­
phy and of the world (of experience) in a form that definitive­
ly limits the former to the latter and more tightly knots the
fundamental and the regional together without contingency.
